APPENDIX



ELEMENTS IN QUENYA AND SINDARIN NAMES


These notes have been compiled for those who take an interest in the Eldarin
languages, and The Lord of the Rings is extensively drawn upon for illustration.
They are necessarily very compressed, giving an air of certainty and finality that
is not altogether justified; and they are very selective, this depending both on
considerations of length and the limitations of the editor’s knowledge. The
headings are not arranged systematically by roots or in Quenya or Sindarin
forms, but somewhat arbitrarily, the aim being to make the component elements
of names as readily identifiable as possible.

adan (plural Edain ) in Adanedhel, Aradan, Dunedain. For its meaning and

history see Atani in the Index.

aelin ‘lake, pool’ in Aelin-uial; cf. lin (I).

aglar ‘glory, brilliance’ in Dagor Aglareb, Aglarond. The form in Quenya,
alkar, has transposition of the consonants: to Sindarin aglareb corresponds
Alkarinque. The root is kal-‘ shine’, q.v.
aina ‘holy’ in Amur, Ainulindale.

alda ‘tree’ (Quenya) in Aldaron, Aldudenie, Malinalda, corresponding to
Sindarin galadh (seen in Caras Galadhon and the Galadhrim of
Lothlorien).

alqua ‘swan’ (Sindarin alph ) in Alqualonde; from a root alak-‘ rushing’
occurring also in Ancalagon.

amarth ‘doom’ in Amon Amarth, Cabed Naer amarth,Umarth, and in the
Sindarin form of Turin’s name ‘Master of Doom’, Turamarth. The Quenya
form of the word appears in Turambar.

amon ‘hill’, a Sindarin word occurring as the first element of many names;
plural emyn in Emyn Beraid.

anca ‘jaws’ in Ancalagon (for the second element in this name see alqua).
an(d) ‘long’ in Andram, Anduin; also in Anfalas (‘Langstrand’) in Gondor,
Cair Andros (‘ship of long-foam’) an island in Anduin, and Angerthas ‘long
rune-rows’.

andune ‘sunset, west’ in Andunie, to which corresponds in Sindarin annun,
cf. Annuminas, and Henneth Annun ‘window of the sunset’ in Ithilien. The
ancient root of these words, ndu, meaning ‘down, from on high’, appears
also in Quenya numen ‘the way of the sunset, west’ and in Sindarin dun
‘west’, cf. Dunedain. Adunaic adun in Adunakhor, Anadune was a loan
from Eldarin speech.



anga ‘iron’, Sindarin ang, in Angainor, Angband, Anghabar, Anglachel,
Angrist, Angrod, Anguirel, Gurthang; angren ‘of iron’ in Angrenost, plural
engrin in Ered Engrin.

anna ‘gift’ in Annatar, Melian, Yavanna; the same stem in Andor ‘Land of
Gift’.

annon ‘great door or gate’, plural ennyn, in Annon-in-Gelydh; cf.
Morannon the ‘Black Gate’ of Mordor and Sirannon the ‘Gate-stream’ of
Moria.

ar- ‘beside, outside’ (whence Quenya ar ‘and’, Sindarin a), probably in
Araman ‘outside Aman’; cf. also (Nirnaeth) Arnoediad ‘(Tears) without
reckoning’.

ar(a)- ‘high, noble, royal’ appears in a great many names, as Aradan,
Aredhel, Argonath, Amor, etc.; extended stem arat- appearing in Aratar,
and in arato ‘champion, eminent man’, e.g. Angrod from Angarato and
Finrod from Findarato; also aran ‘king’ in Aranruth. Ereinion ‘scion of
kings’ (name of Gil-galad) has the plural of aran; cf. Fornost Erain ‘Nor-
bury of the Kings’ in Arnor. The prefix Ar- of the Adunaic names of the
Kings of Numenor was derived from this.

arien (the Maia of the Sun) is derived from a root as- seen also in Quenya
are ‘sunlight’.

atar ‘father’ in Atanatari (see Atani in Index), Iluvatar.

band ‘prison, duress’ in Angband; from original mbando, of which the
Quenya form appears in Mandos (Sindarin Ang-band = Quenya
Angamando ).

bar ‘dwelling’ in Bar-en-Danwedh. The ancient word mbar (Quenya mar,
Sindarin bar ) meant the ‘home’ both of persons and of peoples, and thus
appears in many place-names, as Brithombar, Dimbar (the first element of
which means ‘sad, gloomy’), Eldamar, Val(i)mar, Vmyamar, Marnu-
Falmar. Mardil, name of the first of the Ruling Stewards of Gondor, means
‘devoted to the house’ (i.e. of the Kings).

barad ‘tower’ in Barad-dur, Barad Eithel, Barad Nimras; the plural in
Emyn Beraid.

beleg ‘mighty’ in Beleg, Belegaer, Belegost, Laer Cu Beleg.
bragol ‘sudden’ in Dagor Bragollach.

brethil probably means ‘silver birch’; cf. Nimbrethil the birch-woods in
Arvernien, and Fimbrethil, one of the Entwives.
brith ‘gravel’ in Brithiach, Brithombar, Brithon.



(For many names beginning with C see entries under K )


calen (galen) the usual Sindarin word for ‘green’, in Ard-galen, Tol Galen,
Calenardhon; also in Parth Galen (‘Green Sward’) beside Anduin and
Pinnath Gelin (‘Green Ridges’) in Gondor. See kal-.

cam (from kamba ) ‘hand’, but specifically of the hand held cupped in the
attitude of receiving or holding, in Camlost, Erchamion.
carak- This root is seen in Quenya carca ‘fang’, of which the Sindarin
form carch occurs in Carcharoth, and also in Carchost (‘Fang Fort’, one of
the Towers of the Teeth at the entrance to Mordor). Cf. Caragdur, Carach
Angren (‘Iron Jaws’, the rampart and dike guarding the entrance to Udun in
Mordor), and Helcaraxe.

caran ‘red’, Quenya came, in Caranthir, Carnil, Orocarni; also in
Caradhras, from caran-rass, the ‘Red-horn’ in the Misty Mountains, and
Carnimirie ‘red-jewelled’, the rowan-tree in Quickbeam’s song. The
translation of Carcharoth in the text as ‘Red Maw’ must depend on
association with this word; see carak-.

celeb ‘silver’ (Quenya telep, telpe, as in Telperion ) in Celeborn,
Celebrant, Celebros. Celebrimbor means ‘silver-fist’, from the adjective
celebrin ‘silver’ (meaning not ‘made of silver’ but ‘like silver, in hue or
worth’) and paur (Quenya quare) ‘fist’, often used to mean ‘hand’; the
Quenya form of the name was Telperinquar. Celebrindal has celebrin and
tal, dal ‘foot’.

coron ‘mound’ in Corollaire (also called Coron Oiolaire, which latter
word means ‘Ever-summer’, cf. Oiolosse ); cf. Cerin Amroth, the great
mound in Lothlorien.

cu ‘bow’ in Cuthalion, Dor Cuarthol, Laer Cu Beleg.

cuivie ‘awakening’ in Cuivienen (Sindarin Nen Echui). Other derivatives

of the same root are Dor Firn-i-Guinar; coire, the first beginning of Spring,

Sindarin echuir, The Lord of the Rings Appendix D; and coimas ‘life-

bread’, Quenya name of lembas.

cul- ‘golden-red’ in Culurien.

curu ‘skill’ in Curufin(we), Curunir.

dae ‘shadow’ in Dor Daedeloth, and perhaps in Daeron.

dagor ‘battle’; the root is ndak-, cf. Haudh-en-Ndengin. Another

derivative is Dagnir (Dagnir Glaurunga ‘Glaurung’s Bane’).

del ‘horror’ in Delduwath; deloth ‘abhorrence’ in Dor Daedeloth.

dm ‘silent’ in Dor Dmen; cf. Rath Dmen, the Silent Street in Minas Tirith,



and Amon Dm, one of the beacon-hills of Gondor.

dol ‘head’ in Lorindol; often applied to hills and mountains, as in Dol
Guldur, Dolmed, Mindolluin (also Nardol, one of the beacon-hills of
Gondor, and Fanuidhol, one of the Mountains of Moria).
dor ‘land’ (i.e. dry land as opposed to sea) was derived from ndor; it
occurs in many Sindarin names, as Doriath, Dorthonion, Eriador, Gondor,
Mordor, etc. In Quenya the stem was blended and confused with a quite
distinct word nore meaning ‘people’; in origin Valinore was strictly ‘the
people of the Valar’, but Valandor ‘the land of the Valar’, and similarly
Numen(n)ore ‘people of the West’, but Numendor ‘land of the West’.
Quenya Endor ‘Middle-earth’ was from ened ‘middle’ and ndor; this in
Sindarin became Ennor (cf. ennorath ‘middle lands’ in the chant A Elbereth
Gilthoniel ).

draug ‘wolf’ in Draugluin.

du ‘night, dimness’ in Delduwath, Ephel Duath. Derived from earlier
dome, whence Quenya lome; thus Sindarin dulin ‘nightingale’ corresponds
to lomelinde.

duin ‘(long) river’ in Anduin, Baranduin, Esgalduin, Malduin, Taur-im-
Duinath.

dur ‘dark’ in Barad-dur, Caragdur, Dol Guldur; also in Durthang (a castle
in Mordor).

ear ‘sea’ (Quenya) in Earendil, Earrame, and many other names. The
Sindarin word gaer (in Belegaer ) is apparently derived from the same
original stem.

echor in Echoriath ‘Encircling Mountains’ and Orfalch Echor; cf.
Rammas Echor ‘the great wall of the outer circle’ about the Pelennor Fields
at Minas Tirith.

edhel ‘elf’ (Sindarin) in Adanedhel, Aredhel, Gloredhel, Ost-in-Edhil; also
in Peredhil ‘Half-elven’.

eithel ‘well’ in Eithel Ivrin, Eithel Sirion, Barad Eithel; also in Mitheithel,
the river Hoarwell in Eriador (named from its source). See kel-.
el, elen ‘star’. According to Elvish legend, e/e was a primitive exclamation
‘behold!’ made by the Elves when they first saw the stars. From this origin
derived the ancient words el and elen, meaning ‘star’, and the adjectives
elda and elena, meaning ‘of the stars’. These elements appear in a great
many names. For the later use of the name Eldar see the Index. The
Sindarin equivalent of Elda was Edhel (plural Edhil), q.v.; but the strictly
corresponding form was Eledh, which occurs in Eledhwen.



er ‘one, alone’, in Amon Ereb (cf. Erebor, the Lonely Mountain),

Erchamion, Eressea, Eru.

ereg ‘thorn, holly’ in Eregion, Region.

esgal ‘screen, hiding’ in Esgalduin.

falas ‘shore, line of surf’ (Quenya falasse ) in Falas, Belfalas; also Anfalas
in Gondor. Cf. Falathar, Falathrim. Another derivative from the root was
Quenya falma ‘(crested) wave’, whence Falmari, Mar-nu-Falmar.
faroth is derived from a root meaning ‘hunt, pursue’; in the Lay of
Leithian the Taur-en-Faroth above Nargothrond are called ‘the Hills of the
Hunters’.

faug- ‘gape’ in Anfauglir, Anfauglith, Dor-nu-Fauglith.

fea ‘spirit’ in Feanor, Feanturi.

fin- ‘hair’ in Finduilas, Fingon, Finrod, Glorfindel.

formen ‘north’ (Quenya) in Formenos; Sindarin forn (also for, forod ) in
Fornost.

fuin ‘gloom, darkness’ (Quenya huine) in Fuinur, Taur-nu-Fuin.

gaer ‘sea’ in Belegaer (and in Gaerys, Sindarin name of Osse). Said to
derive from the stem gaya ‘awe, dread’, and to have been the name made
for the vast and terrifying Great Sea when the Eldar first came to its shores.
gaur ‘werewolf’ (from a root ngwaw- ‘howl’) in Tol-in-Gaurhoth.
gil ‘star’ in Dagor-nuin-Giliath, Osgiliath (giliath ‘host of stars’); Gil-
Estel, Gil-galad.

girith ‘shuddering’ in Nen Girith; cf. also Girithron, name of the last

month of the year in Sindarin ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D).

glm ‘gleam’ (particularly applied to the eyes) in Maeglin.

golodh is the Sindarin form of Quenya Noldo; see gul. Plural Golodhrim,

and Gelydh (in Annon-in-Gelydh).

gond ‘stone’ in Gondolin, Gondor, Gonnhirrim, Argonath, seregon. The
name of the hidden city of King Turgon was devised by him in Quenya as
Ondolinde (Quenya ondo = Sindarin gond, and Unde ‘singing, song’); but it
was known always in legend in the Sindarin form Gondolin, which was
probably interpreted as gond-dolen ‘Hidden Rock’.

gor ‘horror, dread’ in Gorthaur, Gorthol; goroth of the same meaning,
with reduplicated gor, in Gorgoroth, Ered Gorgoroth.
groth (grod) ‘delving, underground dwelling’ in Menegroth, Nogrod
(probably also in Nimrodel, ‘lady of the white cave’). Nogrod was
originally Novrod ‘hollow delving’ (hence the translation Hollowbold ), but



was altered under the influence of naug 'dwarf 5 .

gul 'sorcery 5 in Dol Guldur, Minas Morgul. This word was derived from

the same ancient stem ngol- that appears in Noldor; cf. Quenya nole 'long

study, lore, knowledge 5 . But the Sindarin word was darkened in sense by its

frequent use in the compound morgul ‘black arts 5 .

gurth ‘death 5 in Gurthang (see also Melkor in the Index).

gwaith ‘people 5 in Gwaith-i-Mirdain; cf. Enedwaith ‘Middle-folk 5 , name

of the land between the Greyflood and the Isen.

gwath, wath ‘shadow 5 in Delduwath, Ephel Duath; also in Gwathlo, the
river Greyflood in Eriador. Related forms in Ered Wethrin, Thuringwethil.
(This Sindarin word referred to dim light, not to the shadows of objects cast
by light: these were called morchaint ‘dark shapes 5 .)

hadhod in Hadhodrond (translation of Khazad-dum ) was a rendering of
Khazad into Sindarin sounds.

haudh ‘mound 5 in Haudh-en-Arwen, Haudh-en-Elleth, etc.
heru ‘lord 5 in Herumor, Herunumen; Sindarin hir in Gonnhirrim,
Rohirrim, Barahir; hfril ‘lady 5 in Hirilom.
him ‘cool 5 in Himlad (and Himring ?).

hini ‘children 5 in Eruhmi ‘Children of Eru 5 ; Nam i Hin Hurin.

hith ‘mist 5 in Hithaeglir, Hithlum (also in Nen Hithoel, a lake in Anduin).

Hithlum is Sindarin in form, adapted from the Quenya name Hisilome given

by the Noldorin exiles (Quenya hisie ‘mist 5 , cf. Hisime, the name of the

eleventh month of the year, The Lord of the Rings Appendix D).

hoth ‘host, horde 5 (nearly always in a bad sense) in Tol-in-Gaurhoth; also

in Loss(h)oth, the Snowmen of Forochel ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix

A (I, iii)) and Glamhoth ‘din-horde 5 , a name for Ores.

hyarmen ‘south 5 (Quenya) in Hyarmentir, Sindarin har-, ham, harad.

id ‘void, abyss 5 in Moria.
iant ‘bridge 5 in Iant laur.
lath ‘fence 5 in Doriath.

iaur ‘old 5 in Iant laur; cf. the Elvish name of Bombadil, Iarwain.
ilm- This stem appears in Ilmen, Ilmare, and also in Ilmarin (‘mansion of
the high airs 5 , the dwelling of Manwe and Varda upon Oiolosse).
iluve ‘the whole, the all 5 in Iluvatar.

kal- (gal-) This root, meaning ‘shine 5 , appears in Calacirya, Calaquendi,
Tar-calion; galvorn, Gil-galad, Galadriel. The last two names have no



connexion with Sindarin galadh ‘tree’, although in the case of Galadriel
such a connexion was often made, and the name altered to Galadhriel. In
the High-elven speech her name was Al(a)tariel, derived from alata
‘radiance 5 (Sindarin galad ) and riel ‘garlanded maiden 5 (from a root rig-
‘twine, wreathe 5 ): the whole meaning ‘maiden crowned with a radiant
garland 5 , referring to her hair, calen (galen) ‘green 5 is etymologically
‘bright 5 , and derives from this root; see also aglar.

kano ‘commander 5 : this Quenya word is the origin of the second element
in Fingon and Turgon.

kel- ‘go away 5 , of water ‘flow away, flow down 5 , in Celon; from et-kele
‘issue of water, spring 5 was derived, with transposition of the consonants,
Quenya ehtele, Sindarin eithel.

kemen ‘earth 5 in Kementari; a Quenya word referring to the earth as a flat
floor beneath menel, the heavens.

khelek- ‘ice 5 in Helcar, Helcaraxe (Quenya helka ‘icy, ice-cold 5 ). But in
Helevorn the first element is Sindarin heledh ‘glass 5 , taken from Khuzdul
kheled (cf. Kheled-zaram ‘Mirrormere’); Helevorn means ‘black glass 5 (cf.
galvorn).

khil- ‘follow 5 in Hildor, Hildorien, Eluchil.

kir- ‘cut, cleave 5 in Calacirya, Cirth, Angerthas, Cirith ( Ninniach,
Thoronath ). From the sense ‘pass swiftly through 5 was derived Quenya
dry a ‘sharp-prowed ship 5 (cf. English cutter), and this meaning appears
also in Cirdan, Tar-Ciryatan, and no doubt in the name of Isildur’s son
Ciryon.

lad ‘plain, valley 5 in Dagorlad, Himlad; imlad a narrow valley with steep
sides, in Imladris (cf. also Imlad Morgul in the Ephel Duath).
laure ‘gold 5 (but of light and colour, not of the metal) in Laurelin; the
Sindarin forms in Gloredhel, Glorfindel, Loeg Ningloron, Lorindol,
Rathloriel.

lhach ‘leaping flame 5 in Dagor Bragollach, and probably in Anglachel
(the sword made by Eol of meteoritic iron).

lin (1) ‘pool, mere 5 in Linaewen (which contains aew (Quenya aiwe)
‘small bird 5 ), Teiglin; cf. aelin.

lin- (2) This root, meaning ‘sing, make a musical sound 5 , occurs in
Ainulindale, Laurelin, Lindar, Lindon, Ered Lindon, lomelindi.
lith ‘ash 5 in Anfauglith, Dor-nu-Fauglith; also in Ered Lithui, the Ashen
Mountains, forming the northern border of Mordor, and Lithlad ‘Plain of
Ashes 5 at the feet of Ered Lithui.



lok- 'bend, loop’ in Uruloki (Quenya (h)loke 'snake, serpent’, Sindarin
Ihug).

lom ‘echo’ in Dor-lomin, Ered Lomin; related are Lammoth, Lanthir
Lamath.

lome ‘dusk’ in Lomion, lomelindi; see du.

londe ‘land-locked haven’ in Alqualonde; the Sindarin form lond ( lonn ) in
Mithlond.

los ‘snow’ in Oiolosse (Quenya oio ‘ever’ and losse ‘snow, snow-white’);
Sindarin loss in Amon Uilos and Aeglos.

loth ‘flower’ in Lothlorien, Nimloth; Quenya lote in Ninquelote, Vmgilote.
luin ‘blue’ in Ered Luin, Helluin, Luinil, Mindolluin.

maeg ‘sharp, piercing’ (Quenya maika ) in Maeglin.

mal- ‘gold’ in Malduin, Malinalda; also in mallorn, and in the Field of
Cormallen, which means ‘golden circle’ and was named from the
culumalda trees that grew there (see cul-).

man- ‘good, blessed, unmarred’ in Aman, Manwe; derivatives of Aman in
Amandil, Araman,Umanyar.

mel- ‘love’ in Melian (from Melyanna ‘dear gift’); this stem is seen also in
the Sindarin word mellon ‘friend’ in the inscription on the West-gate of
Moria.

men ‘way’ in Numen, Hyarmen, Romen, Formen.

menel ‘the heavens’ in Meneldil, Menelmacar, Meneltarma.

mereth ‘feast’ in Mereth Aderthad; also in Merethrond, the Hall of Feasts

in Minas Tirith.

minas ‘tower’ in Annuminas, Minas Anor, Minas Tirith, etc. The same
stem occurs in other words referring to isolated, prominent, things, e.g.
Mindolluin, Mindon; probably related is Quenya minya ‘first’ (cf. Tar-
Minyatur, the name of Elros as first King of Numenor).
mir ‘jewel’ (Quenya mire) in Elemmrre, Gwaith-i-Mirdain, Miriel,
Nauglamir, Tar-Atanamir.

mith ‘grey’ in Mithlond, Mithrandir, Mithrim; also in Mitheithel, the river
Hoarwell in Eriador.

mor ‘dark’ in Mordor, Morgoth, Moria, Moriquendi, Mormegil, Morwen,
etc.

moth ‘dusk’ in Nan Elmoth.

nan(d) ‘valley’ in Nan Dungortheb, Nan Elmoth, Nan Tathren.

nar ‘fire’ in Narsil, Narya; present also in the original forms of Aegnor



(Aikanaro ‘Sharp Flame’ or ‘Fell Fire’) and Feanor (Feanaro ‘Spirit of
Fire’). The Sindarin form was naur, as in Sammath Naur, the Chambers of
Fire in Orodruin. Derived from the same ancient root (a)nar was the name
of the Sun, Quenya Anar (also in Anarion ), Sindarin Anor (cf. Minas Anor,
Anorien ).

naug ‘dwarf’ in Naugrim; see also Nogrod in entry groth. Related is
another Sindarin word for ‘dwarf’, nogoth, plural noegyth (Noegyth Nibin
‘Petty-dwarves’) and nogothrim.

-(n)dil is a very frequent ending of personal names, Amandil, Earendil
(shortened Earnil ), Elendil, Mardil, etc.; it implies ‘devotion’, ‘disinterested
love’ (see Mardil in entry bar).

-(n)dur in names such as Earendur (shortened Earnur) is similar in
meaning to -(n)dil.

neldor ‘beech’ in Neldoreth; but it seems that this was properly the name
of Hirilorn, the great beech-tree with three trunks ( nelde ‘three’ and orn).
nen ‘water’, used of lakes, pools, and lesser rivers, in Nen Girith, Nenning,
Nenuial, Nenya; Cuivienen, Uinen; also in many names in The Lord of the
Rings, as Nen Hithoel, Bruinen, Emyn Amen, Nurnen. Nin ‘wet’ in Loeg
Ningloron; also in Nindalf.

nim ‘white’ (from earlier nimf, nimp ) in Nimbrethil, Nimloth, Nimphelos,
niphredil (niphred ‘pallor’), Barad Nimras, Ered Nimrais. The Quenya
form was ninque; thus Ninquelote = Nimloth. Cf. also Taniquetil.

orn ‘tree’ in Celeborn, Hirilorn; cf. Fangorn ‘Treebeard’, and mallorn,
plural mellyrn, the trees of Lothlorien.

orod ‘mountain’ in Orodruin, Thangorodrim; Orocarni, Oromet. Plural
ered in Ered Engrin, Ered Lindon, etc.

os(t) ‘fortress’ in Angrenost, Belegost, Formenos, Fornost, Mandos,
Nargothrond (from Narog-ost-rond ), Os(t)giliath, Ost-in-Edhil.

palan (Quenya) ‘far and wide’ in palantiri, Tar-Palantir.
pel- ‘go round, encircle’ in Pelargir, Pelori, and in the Pelennor, the
‘fenced land’ of Minas Tirith; also in Ephel Brandir, Ephel Duath (ephel
from et-pel ‘outer fence’).

quen- (quet-) ‘say, speak’ in Quendi ( Calaquendi, Laiquendi, Moriquendi),
Quenya, Valaquenta, Quenta Silmarillion. The Sindarin forms have p (or b )
for qu; e.g. pedo ‘speak’ in the inscription on the West-gate of Moria,
corresponding to the Quenya stem quet-, and Gandalf’s words before the



gate, lasto beth lammen ‘listen to the words of my tongue’, where beth
‘word’ corresponds to Quenya quetta.

ram ‘wall’ (Quenya ramba) in Andram, Ramdal; also in Rammas Echor,
the wall about the Pelennor Fields at Minas Tirith.

ran- ‘wander, stray’ in Rana, the Moon, and in Mithrandir, Aerandir; also
in the river Gilraen in Gondor.

rant ‘course’ in the river-names Adurant (with adu ‘double’) and
Celebrant (‘Silverlode’).

ras ‘horn’ in Barad Nimras, also in Caradhras (‘Redhorn’) and Methedras
(‘Last Peak’) in the Misty Mountains; plural rais in Ered Nimrais.
rauko ‘demon’ in Valaraukar; Sindarin raug, rog in Balrog.
ril ‘brilliance’ in Idril, Silmaril; also in Anduril (the sword of Aragorn) and
in mithril (Moria-silver). Idril’s name in Quenya form was Itarille (or
Itarilde), from a stem ita-‘ sparkle’.

rim ‘great number, host’ (Quenya rimbe) was commonly used to form
collective plurals, as Golodhrim, Mithrim (see the Index), Naugrim,
Thangorodrim, etc.

ring ‘cold, chill’ in Ringil, Ringwil, Himring; also in the river Ringlo in
Gondor, and in Ringare, Quenya name of the last month of the year ( The
Lord of the Rings Appendix D).

ris ‘cleave’ appears to have blended with the stem kris- of similar meaning
(a derivative of the root kir- ‘cleave, cut’, q.v.); hence Angrist (also Orcrist
‘Orc-cleaver’, the sword of Thorin Oakenshield), Crissaegrim, Imladris.
roch ‘horse’ (Quenya rokko) in Rochallor, Rohan (from Rochand ‘land of
horses’), Rohirrim; also in Roheryn ‘horse of the lady’ (cf. heru), Aragorn’s
horse, which was so called because given to him by Arwen ( The Return of
the King V 2).

rom- A stem used of the sound of trumpets and horns which appears in
Orome and Valaroma; cf. Bema, the name of this Vala in the language of
Rohan as translated into Anglo-Saxon in The Lord of the Rings Appendix A
(II): Anglo-Saxon beme ‘trumpet’.

romen ‘uprising, sunrise, east’ (Quenya) in Romenna. The Sindarin words
for ‘east’, rhun (in Talath Rhunen ) and amrun, were of the same origin.
rond meant a vaulted or arched roof, or a large hall or chamber so roofed;
so Nargothrond (see ost ), Hadhodrond, Aglarond. It could be applied to the
heavens, hence the name Elrond ‘star-dome’.

ros ‘foam, spindrift, spray’ in Celebros, Elros, Rauros; also in Cair
Andros, an island in the river Anduin.



ruin ‘red flame’ (Quenya runya ) in Orodruin.
ruth ‘anger’ in Aranruth.

sarn ‘(small) stone’ in Sam Athrad (Sam Ford on the Brandywine is a
half-translation of this); also in Sam Gebir (‘stone-spikes’: ceber, plural
cebir ‘stakes’), rapids in the river Anduin. A derivative is Semi, a river in
Gondor.

sereg ‘blood’ (Quenya serke ) in seregon.

sil- (and variant th/7-) ‘shine (with white or silver light)’ in Belthil,
Galathilion, Silpion, and in Quenya Isil, Sindarin Ithil, the Moon (whence
Isildur, Narsil; Minas Ithil, Ithilien). The Quenya word Silmarilli is said to
derive from the name silima that Feanor gave to the substance from which
they were made.

sir ‘river’, from root sir- ‘flow’, in Ossiriand (the first element is from the
stem of the numeral ‘seven’, Quenya otso, Sindarin odo ), Sirion; also in
Sirannon (the ‘Gate-stream’ of Moria) and Sirith (‘a flowing’, as tirith
‘watching’ from tir), a river in Gondor. With change of s to h in the middle
of words it is present in Minhiriath ‘between the rivers’, the region between
the Brandywine and the Greyflood; in Nanduhirion ‘vale of dim streams’,
the Dimrill Dale (see nan(d) and du); and in Ethir Anduin, the outflow or
delta of Anduin (from et-sir ).

sul ‘wind’ in Amon Sul, Sulimo; cf. Sulime, Quenya name of the third
month of the year ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D).

tal (dal) ‘foot’ in Celebrindal, and with the meaning ‘end’ in Ramdal.

talath ‘flat lands, plain’ in Talath Dirnen, Talath Rhunen.

tar- ‘high’ (Quenya tara ‘lofty’), prefix of the Quenya names of the

Numenorean Kings; also in Annatar. Feminine tari ‘she that is high, Queen’

in Elentari, Kementari. Cf. tarma ‘pillar’ in Meneltarma.

tathar ‘willow’; adjective tathren in Nan-tathren; Quenya tasare in

Tasarinan, Nan-tasarion (see Nan-tathren in the Index).

taur ‘wood, forest’ (Quenya taure ) in Tauron, Taur-im-Duinath, Taur-nu-

Fuin.

tel- ‘finish, end, be last’ in Teleri.

thalion ‘strong, dauntless’ in Cuthalion, Thalion.

thang ‘oppression’ in Thangorodrim, also in Durthang (a castle in
Mordor). Quenya sanga meant ‘press, throng’, whence Sangahyando
‘Throng-cleaver’, name of a man in Gondor ( The Lord of the Rings
Appendix A (I, iv)).



thar- ‘athwart, across’ in Sam Athrad, Thargelion; also in Tharbad (from
thara-pata ‘crossway’) where the ancient road from Arnor and Gondor
crossed the Greyflood.

thaur ‘abominable, abhorrent’ in Sauron (from Thauron), Gorthaur.
thin(d) ‘grey’ in Thingol; Quenya sinda in Sindar, Singollo ( Sindacollo :
collo ‘cloak’).

thol ‘helm’ in Dor Cuarthol, Gorthol.
thon ‘pine-tree’ in Dorthonion.

thoron ‘eagle’ in Thorondor (Quenya Sorontar ), CirithThoronath. The
Quenya form is perhaps present in the constellation-name Soronume.
til ‘point, horn’ in Taniquetil, Tilion (‘the Horned’); also in Celebdil
‘Silvertine’, one of the Mountains of Moria.

tin- ‘sparkle’ (Quenya tinta ‘cause to sparkle’, tinwe ‘spark’) in Tintalle;
also in tindome ‘starry twilight’ ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D),
whence tindomerel ‘daughter of the twilight’, a poetic name for the
nightingale (Sindarin Tinuviel). It appears also in Sindarin ithildin
‘starmoon’, the substance of which the devices on the West-gate of Moria
were made.

tir ‘watch, watch over’ in Minas Tirith, palantiri, Tar-Palantir, Tirion.
tol ‘isle’ (rising with sheer sides from the sea or from a river) in Tol
Eressea, Tol Galen, etc.

turn ‘valley’ in Tumhalad, Tumladen; Quenya tumbo (cf. Tree-beard’s
tumbalemorna ‘black deep valley’, The Two Towers III 4). Cf. Utumno,
Sindarin Udun (Gandalf in Moria named the Balrog ‘Flame of Udun’), a
name afterwards used of the deep dale in Mordor between the Morannon
and the Isenmouthe.

tur ‘power, mastery’ in Turambar, Turgon, Turin, Feanturi, Tar-Minyatur .
uial ‘twilight’ in Aelin-uial, Nenuial.

ur- ‘heat, be hot’ in Uroloki; cf. Urime and Urui, Quenya and Sindarin
names of the eighth month of the year ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D).
Related is the Quenya word aure ‘sunlight, day’ (cf. Fingon’s cry before the
Nirnaeth Arnoediad), Sindarin aur, which in the form Or- is prefixed to the
names of the days of the week.

val- ‘power’ in Valar, Valacirca, Valaquenta, Valaraukar, Val(i)-mar,
Valinor. The original stem was bal-, preserved in Sindarin Balan, plural
Belain, the Valar, and in Balrog.



wen ‘maiden’ is a frequent ending, as in Earwen, Morwen.

wing ‘foam, spray’ in Elwing, Vmgelot (and only in these two names).

yave ‘fruit’ (Quenya) in Yavanna; cf. Yavannie, Quenya name of the ninth
month of the year, and yavie ‘autumn’ ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D).