NOTF. ON PRONUNCIATION


The following note is intended simply to clarify a few main features in the

pronunciation of names in the Elvish languages, and is by no means exhaustive.

For full information on the subject see The Lord of the Rings Appendix E.

CONSONANTS

C always has the value of k, never of s; thus Celeborn is ‘Keleborn’, not
‘Seleborn’. In a few cases, as Tulkas, Kementari a k has been used in the
spelling in this book.

CH always has the value of ch in Scotch loch or German buch, never that of ch
in English church. Examples are Carcharoth, Erchamion.

DH is always used to represent the sound of a voiced (‘soft’) th in English, that
is the th in then, not the th in thin. Examples are Maedhros, Aredhel,
Haudh-en-Arwen.

G always has the sound of English g in get; thus Region, Eregion are not
pronounced like English region, and the first syllable of Ginglith is as in
English begin, not as in gin.

Consonants written twice are pronounced long; thus Yavanna has the long n

heard in English unnamed, penknife, not the short n in unaimed, penny.

VOWELS

AI has the sound of English eye; thus the second syllable of Edain is like
English dine, not Dane.

AU has the value of English ow in town; thus the first syllable of Aule is like
English owl, and the first syllable of Sauron is like English sour, not sore.

El as in Teiglin has the sound of English grey.

IE should not be pronounced as in English piece, but with both the vowels i
and e sounded, and run together; thus Ni-enna, not ‘Neena’.

UI as in Uinen has the sound of English ruin.

AE as in Aegnor, Nirnaeth, and OE as in Noegyth, Loeg, are combinations of
the individual vowels, a-e, o-e, but ae may be pronounced in the same way
as ai, and oe as in English toy.

EA are not run together, but constitute two syllables; these combinations are



and written ea and eo (or, when they begin names, Ed and £o: Earendil,

EO Ednxve).

U in names like Hurin, Turin, Tuna should be pronounced oo; thus ‘Toorin’,
not ‘Tyoorin’.

ER, before a consonant (as in Nerdanel, Cvrdan, Gurthang ) or at the end of a
IR, word (as in Amur) should not be pronounced as in English fern, fir, fur, but
UR as in English air, eer, oor.

E at the end of words is always pronounced as a distinct vowel, and in this
position is written e. It is likewise always pronounced in the middle of
words like Celeborn, Menegroth.

A circumflex accent in stressed monosyllables in Sindarin denotes the
particularly long vowel heard in such words (thus Hm Hurin); but in Adunaic
(Numenorean) and Khuzdul (Dwarvish) names the circumflex is simply used to
denote long vowels.
