INDF.X OF NAMES


Since the number of names in the book is very large, this index provides, in
addition to page-references, a short statement concerning each person and place.
These statements are not epitomes of all that is said in the text, and for most of
the central figures in the narrative are kept extremely brief; but such an index is
inevitably bulky, and I have reduced its size in various ways.

The chief of these concerns the fact that very often the English translation of
an Elvish name is also used as the name independently; thus for example the
dwelling of King Thingol is called both Menegroth and The Thousand Caves’
(and also both together). In most such cases I have combined the Elvish name
and its translated meaning under one entry, with the result that the page-
references are not restricted to the name that appears as the heading (e.g., those
under Echoriath include those to ‘Encircling Mountains’). The English
renderings are given separate headings, but only with a simple direction to the
main entry, and only if they occur independently. Words in inverted commas are
translations; many of these occur in the text (as Tol Eressea The Lonely Isle’),
but I have added a great many others. Information about some names that are not
translated is contained in the Appendix.

With the many titles and formal expressions in English whose Elvish originals
are not given, such as The Elder King’ and The Two Kindreds’, I have been
selective, but the great majority are registered. The references are in intention
complete (and sometimes include pages where the subject of the entry occurs but
is not actually mentioned by name) except in a very few cases where the name
occurs very frequently indeed, as Beleriand, Valar. Here the word passim is
used, but selected references are given to important passages; and in the entries
for some of the Noldorin princes the many occurrences of the name that relate
only to their sons or their houses have been eliminated.

References to The Lord of the Rings are by title of the volume, book, and
chapter.

Adanedhel ‘Elf-Man’, name given to Turin in Nargothrond.

Adunakhor ‘Lord of the West’, name taken by the twentieth King of
Numenor, the first to do so in the Adunaic (Numenorean) tongue; his name
in Quenya was Herunumen.



Adurant The sixth and most southerly of the tributaries of Gelion in
Ossiriand. The name means ‘double stream’, referring to its divided course
about the island of Tol Galen.

Aeglos ‘Snow-point’, the spear of Gil-galad.

Aegnor The fourth son of Finarfin, who with his brother Angrod held the
northern slopes of Dorthonion; slain in the Dagor Bragollach. The name
means ‘Fell Fire’.

Aelin-uial ‘Meres of Twilight’, where Aros flowed into Sirion.

Aerandir ‘Sea-wanderer’, one of the three mariners who accompanied
Earendil on his voyages.

Aerin A kinswoman of Hurin in Dor-lomin; taken as wife by Brodda the
Easterling; aided Morwen after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.

Aftercomers The Younger Children of Iluvatar, Men; translation of Hildor.
Agarwaen ‘Blood-stained’, name given to himself by Turin when he came
to Nargothrond.

Aglarond ‘The Glittering Cavern’ of Helm’s Deep in Ered Nimrais (see The
Two Towers III 8).

Aglon ‘The Narrow Pass’, between Dorthonion and the heights to the west
of Himring.

Ainulindale ‘The Music of the Ainur’, also called The (Great) Music, The
(Great) Song. Also the name of the account of Creation said to have been
composed by Rumil of Tirion in the Elder Days.

Amur ‘The Holy Ones’ (singular Ainu); the first beings created by Iluvatar,
the ‘order’ of the Valar and Maiar, made before Ea.

Akallabeth ‘The Downfallen’, Adunaic (Numenorean) word equivalent in
meaning to Quenya Atalante. Also the title of the account of the Downfall
of Numenor.

Alcarinque ‘The Glorious’, name of a star.

Alcarondas The great ship of Ar-Pharazon in which he sailed to Aman.
Aldaron ‘Lord of Trees’, a Quenya name of the Vala Orome; cf. Tauron.
Aldudenie ‘Lament for the Two Trees’, made by a Vanyarin Elf named
Elemmire.

Almaren The first abode of the Valar in Arda, before the second onslaught
of Melkor: an isle in a great lake in the midst of Middle-earth.

Alqualonde ‘Haven of the Swans’, the chief city and haven of the Teleri on
the shores of Aman.

Aman ‘Biessed, free from evil’, the name of the land in the West, beyond
the Great Sea, in which the Valar dwelt after they had left the Isle of
Almaren. Often referred to as the Blessed Realm. Passim.



Amandil 'Lover of Arrian’; the last lord of Andunie in Numenor, descendant
of Elros and father of Elendil; set out on a voyage to Valinor and did not
return.

Amarie Vanyarin Elf, beloved of Finrod Felagund, who remained in
Valinor.

Amlach Son of Imlach son of Marach; a leader of dissension among the
Men of Estolad who, repenting, took service with Maedhros.

Amon Amarth 'Mount Doom’, the name given to Orodruin when its fires
awoke again after Sauron’s return from Numenor.

Amon Ereb 'The Lonely Hill’ (also simply Ereb ), between Ramdal and the
river Gelion in East Beleriand.

Amon Ethir 'The Hill of Spies’, raised by Finrod Felagund to the east of the
doors of Nargothrond.

Amon Gwareth The hill upon which Gondolin was built, in the midst of the
plain of Tumladen.

Amon Obel A hill in the midst of the Forest of Brethil, on which was built
Ephel Brandir.

Amon Rudh ‘The Bald Hill’, a lonely height in the lands south of Brethil;
abode of Mim, and lair of Turin’s outlaw band.

Amon Sul ‘Hill of the Wind’, in the Kingdom of Arnor (‘Weathertop’ in The
Lord of the Rings).

Amon Uilos Sindarin name of Oiolosse.

Amras Twin-brother of Amrod, youngest of the sons of Feanor; slain with
Amrod in the attack on Earendil’s people at the Mouths of Sirion.

Amrod See Amras.

Anach Pass leading down from Taur-nu-Fuin (Dorthonion) at the western
end of Ered Gorgoroth.

Anadune ‘Westernesse’: name of Numenor in the Adunaic (Numenorean)
tongue (see Numenor).

Anar Quenya name of the Sun.

Anarion Younger son of Elendil, who with his father and his brother Isildur
escaped from the Drowning of Numenor and founded in Middle-earth the
Numenorean realms in exile; lord of Minas Anor; slain in the siege of
Barad-dur.

Anarrima Name of a constellation.

Ancalagon Greatest of the winged dragons of Morgoth, destroyed by
Earendil.

Andor 'The Land of Gift’: Numenor.

Andram 'The Long Wall’, name of the dividing fall running across



Beleriand.

Androth Caves in the hills of Mithrim where Tuor was fostered by the Grey-
elves.

Anduin The Long River’, east of the Misty Mountains; referred to also as
the Great River and the River.

Andunie City and haven on the west coast of Numenor.

Anfauglir A name of the wolf Carcharoth, translated in the text as ‘Jaws of
Thirst’.

Anfauglith Name of the plain of Ard-galen after its desolation by Morgoth
in the Battle of Sudden Flame; translated in the text as ‘the Gasping Dust’.
Cf. Dor-nu-Fauglith.

Angainor The chain wrought by Aule with which Melkor was twice bound.
Angband ‘Iron Prison, Hell of Iron’, the great dungeon-fortress of Morgoth
in the Northwest of Middle-earth. The Siege of Angband.

Anghabar ‘Iron-delvings’, a mine in the Encircling Mountains about the
plain of Gondolin.

Anglachel The sword made from meteoritic iron that Thingol received from
Eol and which he gave to Beleg; after its reforging for Turin named
Gurthang.

Angrenost ‘Iron Fortress’, Numenorean fortress on the west borders of
Gondor, afterwards inhabited by the wizard Curunir (Saruman); see
Isengard.

Angrim Father of Gorlim the Unhappy.

Angrist ‘Iron-cleaver’, the knife made by Telchar of Nogrod, taken from
Curufin by Beren and used by him to cut the Silmaril from Morgoth’s
crown.

Angrod The third son of Finarfin, who with his brother Aegnor held the
northern slopes of Dorthonion; slain in the Dagor Bragollach.

Anguirel Eol’s sword, made of the same metal as Anglachel.

Annael Grey-elf of Mithrim, fosterfather of Tuor.

Annatar ‘Lord of Gifts’, name given to himself by Sauron in the Second
Age, in that time when he appeared in a fair form among the Eldar who
remained in Middle-earth.

Annon-in-Gelydh ‘Gate of the Noldor’, entrance to a subterranean water¬
course in the western hills of Dor-lomin, leading to Cirith Ninniach.
Annuminas ‘Tower of the West’ (i.e. of Westernesse, Numenor); city of the
Kings of Arnor beside Lake Nenuial.

Anor See Minas Anor.

Apanonar ‘The Afterborn’, an Elvish name for Men.



Aradan Sindarin name of Malach, son of Marach.

Aragorn The thirty-ninth Heir of Isildur in the direct line; King of the
reunited realms of Arnor and Gondor after the War of the Ring; wedded
Arwen, daughter of Elrond. Called the Heir of Isildur.

Araman Barren wasteland on the coast of Aman, between the Pelori and the
Sea, extending northward to the Helcaraxe.

Aranel Name of Dior Thingol’s Heir.

Aranruth ‘King’s Ire’, the name of Thingol’s sword. Aranruth survived the
ruin of Doriath and was possessed by the Kings of Numenor.

Aranwe Elf of Gondolin, father of Voronwe.

Aratari Second son of Isildur, slain with him at the Gladden Fields.

Aratar ‘The Exalted’, the eight Valar of greatest power.

Arathorn Father of Aragorn.

Arda ‘The Realm’, name of the Earth as the Kingdom of Manwe.

Ard-galen The great grassy plain north of Dorthonion, called after its
desolation Anfauglith and Dor-nu-Fauglith. The name means ‘the Green
Region’; cf. Calen-ardhon (Rohan).

Aredhel ‘Noble Elf’, the sister of Turgon of Gondolin, who was ensnared
by Eol in Nan Elmoth and bore to him Maeglin; called also Ar-Feiniel, the
White Lady of the Noldor, the White Lady of Gondolin.

Ar-Feiniel See Aredhel.

Ar-Gimilzor Twenty-third King of Numenor, persecutor of the Elendili.
Argonath ‘King-stones’, the Pillars of the Kings, great carvings of Isildur
and Anarion on the Anduin at the entrance to the northern bounds of
Gondor (see The Fellowship of the Ring II 9).

Arien A Maia, chosen by the Valar to guide the vessel of the Sun.

Armenelos City of the Kings in Numenor.

Arminas See Gelmir (2).

Arnor ‘Land of the King’, the northern realm of the Numenoreans in
Middle-earth, established by Elendil after his escape from the Drowning of
Numenor.

Aros The southern river of Doriath.

Arossiach The Fords of Aros, near the north-eastern edge of Doriath.
Ar-Pharazon ‘The Golden’, twenty-fifth and last King of Numenor; named
in Quenya Tar-Calion; captor of Sauron, by whom he was seduced;
commander of the great fleet that went against Aman.

Ar-Sakalthor Father of Ar-Gimilzor.

Arthad One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.

Arvernien The coastlands of Middle-earth west of Sirion’s mouths. Cf.



Bilbo’s song at Rivendell: ‘Earendil was a mariner that tarried in
Arvernien...’ ( The Fellowship of the Ring II1).

Ar-Zimraphel See Miriel (2).

Ascar The most northerly of the tributaries of Gelion in Ossiriand
(afterwards called Rathloriel ). The name means hushing, impetuous’.
Astaldo The Valiant’, name of the Vala Tulkas.

Atalante The Downfallen’, Quenya word equivalent in meaning to
Akallabeth.

Atanamir See Tar-Atanamir.

Atanatari 'Fathers of Men’; see Atani.

Atani The Second People’, Men (singular Atan). Since in Beleriand for a
long time the only Men known to the Noldor and Sindar were those of the
Three Houses of the Elf-friends, this name (in the Sindarin form Adan,
plural Edain) became specially associated with them, so that it was seldom
applied to other Men who came later to Beleriand, or who were reported to
be dwelling beyond the Mountains. But in the speech of Iluvatar (35) the
meaning is ‘Men (in general)’.

Aule A Vala, one of the Aratar, the smith and master of crafts, spouse of
Yavanna; and for his making of the Dwarves.

Avallone Haven and city of the Eldar on Tol Eressea, so named, according
to the Akallabeth, ‘for it is of all cities the nearest to Valinor’.

Avari The Unwilling, the Refusers’, the name given to all those Elves who
refused to join the westward march from Cuivienen. See Eldar and Dark
Elves.

Avathar The Shadows’, the forsaken land on the coast of Aman south of
the Bay of Eldamar, between the Pelori and the Sea, where Melkor met
Ungoliant.

Azaghal Lord of the Dwarves of Belegost; wounded Glaurung in the
Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and was killed by him.

Balanz The name of Beor the Old before he took service with Finrod.

Balar The great bay to the south of Beleriand into which the river Sirion
flowed. Also the isle in the bay, said to have been the eastern horn of Tol
Eressea that broke away, where Cirdan and Gil-galad dwelt after the
Nirnaeth Arnoediad.

Balrog ‘Demon of Might’, Sindarin form (Quenya Valarauko ) of the name
of the demons of fire that served Morgoth.

Barad-dur The Dark Tower’ of Sauron in Mordor.

Barad Eithel Tower of the Well’, the fortress of the Noldor at Eithel Sirion.



Bar ad Nimras 'White Horn Tower’, raised by Finrod Felagund on the cape
west of Eglarest.

Baragund Father of Morwen the wife of Hurin; nephew of Barahir and one
of his twelve companions on Dorthonion.

Barahir Father of Beren; rescued Finrod Felagund in the Dagor Bragollach,
and received from him his ring; slain on Dorthonion. For the later history of
the ring of Barahir, which became an heirloom of the House of Isildur, see
The Lord of the Rings Appendix A (I, iii).

Baran Elder son of Beor the Old.

Baranduin The Brown River’ in Eriador, flowing into the Sea south of the
Blue Mountains; the Brandywine of the Shire in The Lord of the Rings.
Bar-en-Danwedh ‘House of Ransom’, the name that Mim the Dwarf gave
to his dwelling on Amon Rudh when he yielded it to Turin.

Battles of Beleriand The first battle: The second battle (the Battle-under-
Stars): see Dagor-nuin-Giliath. The third battle (the Glorious Battle): see
Dagor Aglareb. The fourth battle (the Battle of Sudden Flame): see Dagor
Bragollach. The fifth battle (Unnumbered Tears): see Nirnaeth Arnoediad.
The Great Battle.

Bauglir A name of Morgoth: ‘the Constrained.

Beleg A great archer and chief of the marchwardens of Doriath; called
Cuthalion ‘Strongbow’; friend and companion of Turin, by whom he was
slain.

Belegaer ‘The Great Sea’ of the West, between Middle-earth and Aman.
Named Belegaer; but very frequently called the (Great) Sea, also the
Western Sea and the Great Water.

Belegost ‘Great Fortress’, one of the two cities of the Dwarves in the Blue
Mountains; translation into Sindarin of Dwarvish Gabilgathol. See
Mickleburg.

Belegund Father of Rian the wife of Huor; nephew of Barahir and one of
his twelve companions on Dorthonion.

Beleriand The name was said to have signified ‘the country of Balar’, and
to have been given at first to the lands about the mouths of Sirion that faced
the Isle of Balar. Later the name spread to include all the ancient coast of
the Northwest of Middle-earth south of the Firth of Drengist, and all the
inner lands south of Hithlum and eastwards to the feet of the Blue
Mountains, divided by the river Sirion into East and West Beleriand.
Beleriand was broken in the turmoils at the end of the First Age, and
invaded by the sea, so that only Ossiriand (Lindon) remained.

Belfalas Region on the southern coast of Gondor looking on to the great



bay of the same name; Bay ofBelfalas

Belthil ‘Divine radiance’, the image of Telperion made by Turgon in
Gondolin.

Belthronding The bow of Beleg Cuthalion, which was buried with him.

Beor Called the Old; leader of the first Men to enter Beleriand; vassal of
Finrod Felagund; progenitor of the House of Beor (called also the Eldest
House of Men and The First House of the Edain ); see Balan. House of,
People of, Beor

Bereg Grandson of Baran son of Beor the Old (this is not stated in the text);
a leader of dissension among the Men of Estolad; went back over the
mountains into Eriador.

Beren Son of Barahir; cut a Silmaril from Morgoth’s crown to be the bride-
price of Luthien Thingol’s daughter, and was slain by Carcharoth the wolf
of Angband; but returning from the dead, alone of mortal Men, lived
afterwards with Luthien on Tol Galen in Ossiriand, and fought with the
Dwarves at Sam Athrad. Great-grandfather of Elrond and Elros and
ancestor of the Numenorean Kings. Called also Camlost, Erchamion, and
One-hand.

Black Land See Mordor.

Black Sword See Mormegil.

Black Years

Blessed Realm See Aman.

Blue Mountains See Ered Luin and Ered Lindon.

Bor A chieftain of the Easterlings, follower with his three sons of Maedhros
and Maglor. Sons of Bor.

Borlach One of the three sons of Bor; slain with his brothers in the Nirnaeth
Arnoediad.

Borlad One of the three sons of Bor; see Borlach.

Boromir Great-grandson of Beor the Old, grandfather of Barahir father of
Beren; first lord of Ladros.

Boron Father of Boromir.

Borthand One of the three sons of Bor; see Borlach.

Bragollach See Dagor Bragollach.

Brandir Called the Lame; ruler of the People of Haleth after the death of
Handir his father; enamoured of Nienor; slain by Turin.

Bregolas Father of Baragund and Belegund; slain in the Dagor Bragollach.
Bregor Father of Barahir and Bregolas.

Brethil The forest between the rivers Teiglin and Sirion, dwelling-place of
the Haladin (the People of Haleth).



Bridge of Esgalduin See Iant Iaur.

Brilthor ‘Glittering Torrent’, the fourth of the tributaries of Gelion in
Ossiriand.

Brithiach The ford over Sirion north of the Forest of Brethil.

Brithombar The northern of the Havens of the Falas on the coast of
Beleriand.

Brithon The river that flowed into the Great Sea at Brithombar.

Brodda An Easterling in Hithlum after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad who took as
wife Aerin, kinswoman of Hurin; slain by Turin.

Cabed-en-Aras Deep gorge in the river Teiglin, where Turin slew Glaurung,
and where Nienor leapt to her death; see Cabed Naeramarth.

Cabed Naeramarth ‘Leap of Dreadful Doom’, name givento Cabed-en-
Aras after Nienor leapt from its cliffs.

Calacirya ‘Cleft of Light’, the pass made in the mountains of the Pelori, in
which was raised the green hill of Tuna.

Calaquendi ‘Elves of the Light’, those Elves who lived or had lived in
Aman (the High Elves). See Moriquendi and Dark Elves.

Calenardhon ‘The Green Province’, name of Rohan when it was the
northern part of Gondor; cf. Ard-galen.

Camlost ‘Empty-handed’, name taken by Beren after his return to King
Thingol without the Silmaril.

Caragdur The precipice on the north side of Amon Gwareth (the hill of
Gondolin) from which Eol was cast to his death.

Caranthir The fourth son of Feanor, called the Dark; ‘the harshest of the
brothers and the most quick to anger’; ruled in Thargelion; slain in the
assault on Doriath.

Carcharoth The great wolf of Angband that bit off the hand of Beren
bearing the Silmaril; slain by Huan in Doriath. The name is translated in the
text as ‘the Red Maw’. Called also Anfauglir.

Cardolan Region in the south of Eriador, a part of the Kingdom of Arnor.
Carnil Name of a (red) star.

Celeborn (1) ‘Tree of Silver’, name of the Tree of Tol Eressea, a scion of
Galathilion.

Celeborn (2) Elf of Doriath, kinsman of Thingol; wedded Galadriel and
with her remained in Middle-earth after the end of the First Age.

Celebrant ‘Silver Lode’, river running from Mirrormere through Lothorien
to join the Anduin.

Celebrimbor ‘Hand of Silver’, son of Curufin, who remained in



Nargothrond when his father was expelled. In the Second Age greatest of
the smiths of Eregion; maker of the Three Rings of the Elves; slain by
Sauron.

Celebrindal ‘Silverfoot’; see Idril.

Celebros 'Silver Foam’ or 'Silver Rain’, a stream in Brethil falling down to
Teiglin near the Crossings.

Celegorm The third son of Feanor, called the Fair; until the Dagor
Bragollach lord of the region of Himlad with Curufin his brother; dwelt in
Nargothrond and imprisoned Futhien; master of Huan the wolfhound; slain
by Dior in Menegroth.

Celon River flowing southwest from the Hill of Himring, a tributary of
Aros. The name means ‘stream flowing down from heights’.

Children of Iluvatar Also Children of Eru: translations of Hmi Iluvataro,
Eruhmi; the Firstborn and the Followers, Elves and Men. Also The
Children, Children of the Earth, Children of the World.

Cvrdan ‘The Shipwright’; Telerin Elf, lord of the Falas (coasts of West
Beleriand); at the destruction of the Havens after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad
escaped with Gil-galad to the Isle of Balar; during the Second and Third
Ages keeper of the Grey Havens in the Gulf of Fhun; at the coming of
Mithrandir entrusted to him Narya, the Ring of Fire.

Cirith Ninniach ‘Rainbow Cleft’, by which Tuor came to the Western Sea;
see Annon-in-Gelydh.

Cirith Thoronath ‘Eagles’ Cleft’, a high pass in the mountains north of
Gondolin, where Glorfindel fought with a Balrog and fell into the abyss.
Cirth The Runes, first devised by Daeron of Doriath.

Ciryon Third son of Isildur, slain with him at the Gladden Fields.

Corollaire ‘The Green Mound’ of the Two Trees in Valinor; also called
Ezellohar.

Crissaegrim The mountain-peaks south of Gondolin, where were the eyries
of Thorondor.

Crossings of Teiglin In the southwest of the Forest of Brethil, where the old
road southward from the Pass of Sirion crossed the Teiglin.

Cuivienen ‘Water of Awakening’, the lake in Middle-earth where the first
Elves awoke, and where they were found by Orome.

Culurien A name of Faurelin.

Curufin The fifth son of Feanor, called the Crafty; father of Celebrimbor.
For the origin of his name see Feanor; and for his history see Celegorm.
Curufinwe See Feanor.

Curunir ‘The one of cunning devices’, Elvish name of Saruman, one of the



Istari (Wizards).

Cuthalion ‘Strongbow’; see Beleg.

Daeron Minstrel and chief loremaster of King Thingol; deviser of the Cirth
(Runes); enamoured of Luthien and twice betrayed her.

Dagnir One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.

Dagnir Glaurunga ‘Glaurung’s Bane’, Turin.

Dagor Aglareb The Glorious Battle’, third of the great battles in the Wars
of Beleriand.

Dagor Bragollach The Battle of Sudden Flame’ (also simply the
Bragollach ), fourth of the great battles in the Wars of Beleriand.

Dagorlad 'Battle Plain’, the place of the great battle north of Mordor
between Sauron and the Last Alliance of Elves and Men at the end of the
Second Age.

Dagor-nuin-Giliath The Battle-under-Stars’, the second battle in the Wars
of Beleriand, fought in Mithrim after the coming of Feanor to Middle-earth.
Dairuin One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.

Dark Elves In the language of Aman all Elves that did not cross the Great
Sea were Dark Elves ( Moriquendi ), and the term is sometimes used thus,
when Caranthir called Thingol a Dark Elf it was intended opprobriously,
and was especially so, since Thingol had been to Aman ‘and was not
accounted among the Moriquendi’. But in the period of the Exile of the
Noldor it was often used of the Elves of Middle-earth other than the Noldor
and the Sindar, and is then virtually equivalent to Avari. Different again is
the title Dark Elf of the Sindarin Elf Eol, but Turgon no doubt meant that
E61 was of the Moriquendi.

Dark Lord, The The term is used of Morgoth, and of Sauron.

Days of Flight

Deathless Lands See Undying Lands.

Delduwath One of the later names of Dorthonion (Taur-nu-Fuin), meaning
‘Horror of Night-shadow’.

Denethor Son of Lenwe; leader of the Nandorin Elves that came at last over
the Blue Mountains and dwelt in Ossiriand; slain on Amon Ereb in the First
Battle of Beleriand.

Dimbar The land between the rivers Sirion and Mindeb.

Dimrost The falls of Celebros in the Forest of Brethil; translated in the text
as ‘the Rainy Stair’. Afterwards called Nen Girith.

Dior Called Aranel, and also Eluchil ‘Thingol’s Heir’; son of Beren and
Luthien and father of Elwing, Elrond’s mother; came to Doriath from



Ossiriand after the death of Thingol, and received the Silmaril after the
death of Beren and Luthien; slain in Menegroth by the sons of Feanor.
Dispossessed, The The House of Feanor.

Dol Guldur ‘Hill of Sorcery’, fastness of the Necromancer (Sauron) in
southern Mirkwood in the Third Age.

Dolmed ‘Wet Head’, a great mountain in the Ered Luin, near the Dwarf-
cities of Nogrod and Belegost.

Dor Caranthir ‘Land of Caranthir’; see Thargelion.

Dor-Cuarthol ‘Land of Bow and Helm’, name of the country defended by
Beleg and Turin from their lair on Amon Rudh.

Dor Daedeloth ‘Land of the Shadow of Horror’, the land of Morgoth in the
north.

Dor Dmen ‘The Silent Land’, where nothing dwelt, between the upper
waters of Esgalduin and Aros.

Dor Firn-i-Guinar ‘Land of the Dead that Live’, name of that region in
Ossiriand where Beren and Luthien dwelt after their return.

Doriath ‘Land of the Fence’ (Dor lath), referring to the Girdle of Melian,
earlier called Eglador; the kingdom of Thingol and Melian in the forests of
Neldoreth and Region, ruled from Menegroth on the river Esgalduin. Also
called the Hidden Kingdom.

Dorlas A Man of the Haladin in Brethil; went with Turin and Hunthor to
the attack on Glaurung, but withdrew in fear; slain by Brandir the Lame.
The wife of Dorlas, not named.

Dor-lomin Region in the south of Hithlum, the territory of Fingon, given as
a fief to the House of Hador; the home of Hurin and Morwen. The Lady of
Dor-lomin : Morwen.

Dor-nu-Fauglith ‘Land under Choking Ash’; see Anfauglith.

Dorthonion ‘Land of Pines’, the great forested highlands on the northern
borders of Beleriand, afterwards called Taur-nu-Fuin. Cf. Treebeard’s song
in The Two Towers III 4: ‘To the pine-trees upon the highlands of
Dorthonion I climbed in the Winter...’

Dragon-helm of Dor-lomin Heirloom of the House of Hador, worn by
Turin; also called the Helm of Hador.

Dragons

Draugluin The great werewolf slain by Huan at Tol-in-Gaurhoth, and in
whose form Beren entered Angband.

Drengist The long firth that pierced Ered Lomin, the west-fence of Hithlum.
Dry River The river that once flowed out under the Encircling Mountains
from the primeval lake where was afterwards Tumladen, the plain of



Gondolin.

Duilwen The fifth of the tributaries of Gelion in Ossiriand.

Dunedain ‘The Edain of the West’; see Numenoreans.

Dungortheb See Nan Dungortheb.

Durin Lord of the Dwarves of Khazad-dum (Moria).

Dwarf-road Road leading down into Beleriand from the cities of Nogrod
and Belegost, and crossing Gelion at the ford of Sam Athrad.

Dwarrowdelf ‘Delving of the Dwarves’; translation of Khazaddum
(Hadhodrond).

Dwarves Referring to the Petty-Dwarves: Seven Fathers of the Dwarves:
For the Necklace of the Dwarves see Nauglamir. For the Seven Rings of the
Dwarves see Rings of Power. See also Naugrim.

Ed The World, the material Universe; Ed, meaning in Elvish ‘It is’ or ‘Let it
be’, was the word of Iluvatar when the World began its existence.

Earendil Called ‘Halfelven’, ‘the Blessed’, ‘the Bright’, and ‘the Mariner’;
son of Tuor and Idril Turgon’s daughter; escaped from the sack of Gondolin
and wedded Elwing daughter of Dior at the Mouths of Sirion; sailed with
her to Aman and pleaded for help against Morgoth; set to sail the skies in
his ship Vingilot bearing the Silmaril that Beren and Luthien brought out of
Angband. The name means ‘Lover of the Sea’.

Earendur (1) A lord of Andunie in Numenor.

Earendur (2) Tenth King of Arnor.

Earnil Thirty-second King of Gondor.

Earnur Son of Earnil; last King of Gondor, in whom the line of Anarion
came to its end.

Earrame ‘Sea-wing’, the name of Tuor’s ship.

Earwen Daughter of Olwe of Alqualonde, Thingol’s brother; wedded
Finarfin of the Noldor. From Earwen Finrod, Orodreth, Angrod, Aegnor
and Galadriel had Telerin blood and were therefore allowed entry into
Doriath.

Easterlings Also called Swarthy Men; entered Beleriand from the East in
the time after the Dagor Bragollach, and fought on both sides in the
Nirnaeth Arnoediad; given Hithlum as a dwelling-place by Morgoth, where
they oppressed the remnant of the People of Hador.

Echoing Mountains See Ered Lomin.

Echoriath ‘The Encircling Mountains’ about the plain of Gondolin.
Ecthelion Elf-lord of Gondolin, who in the sack of the city slew and was
slain by Gothmog Lord of Balrogs.



Edain See Atani.

Edrahil Chief of the Elves of Nargothrond who accompanied Finrod and
Beren on their quest, and died in the dungeons of Tol-in-Gaurhoth.

Eglador The former name of Doriath, before it was encompassed by the
Girdle of Melian; probably connected with the name Eg lath.

Eglarest The southern of the Havens of the Falas on the coast of Beleriand.
Eglath ‘The Forsaken People’, name given to themselves by the Telerin
Elves who remained in Beleriand seeking for Elwe (Thingol) when the
main host of the Teleri departed to Aman.

Eilinel The wife of Gorlim the Unhappy.

Eithel Ivrin ‘Ivrin’s Well’, the source of the river Narog beneath Ered
Wethrin.

Eithel Sirion ‘Sirion’s Well’, in the eastern face of Ered Wethrin, where was
the great fortress of Fingolfin and Fingon (see Barad Eithel ).

Ekkaia Elvish name of the Outer Sea, encircling Arda; referred to also as
the Outer Ocean and the Encircling Sea.

Elbereth The usual name of Varda in Sindarin, ‘Star-Queen’; cf. Elentari.
Eldalie ‘The Elven-folk’, used as equivalent to Eldar.

Eldamar ‘Elvenhome’, the region of Aman in which the Elves dwelt; also
the great Bay of the same name.

Eldar According to Elvish legend the name Eldar ‘People of the Stars’ was
given to all the Elves by the Vala Orome. It came however to be used to
refer only to the Elves of the Three Kindreds (Vanyar, Noldor, and Teleri)
who set out on the great westward march from Cuivienen (whether or not
they remained in Middle-earth), and to exclude the Avari. The Elves of
Aman, and all Elves who ever dwelt in Aman, were called the High Elves
(Tareldar) and Elves of the Light ( Calaquendi ); see Dark Elves,Umanyar.
Passim; see entry Elves.

Eldarin Of the Eldar; used in reference to the language(s) of the Eldar. The
occurrences of the term in fact refer to Quenya, also called High Eldarin
and High-elven; see Quenya.

Elder Days The First Age; also called the Eldest Days.

Elder King Manwe.

Eledhwen See Morwen.

Elemmire (1) Name of a star.

Elemmire (2) Vanyarin Elf, maker of the Aldudenie, the Lament for the Two
Trees.

Elende A name of Eldamar.

Elendil Called the Tall; son of Amandil, last lord of Andunie in Numenor,



descended from Earendil and Elwing but not of the direct line of the Kings;
escaped with his sons Isildur and Anarion from the Drowning of Numenor
and founded the Numenorean realms in Middle-earth; slain with Gil-galad
in the overthrow of Sauron at the end of the Second Age. The name may be
interpreted either as 'Elf-friend’ (cf. Elendili)or as ‘Star-lover’. Heirs of
Elendil.

Elendili ‘Elf-friends’, name given to those Numenoreans who were not
estranged from the Eldar in the days of Tar-Ancalimon and later kings; also
called the Faithful.

Elendur Eldest son of Isildur, slain with him at the Gladden Fields.

Elenna A (Quenya) name of Numenor, ‘Starwards’, from the guidance of
the Edain by Earendil on their voyage to Numenor at the beginning of the
Second Age.

Elentari ‘Star-Queen’, a name of Varda as maker of the Stars. She is called
thus in Galadriel’s lament in Lorien, The Fellowship of the Ring II 8. Cf.
Elbereth, Tintalle.

Elenwe Wife of Turgon; perished in the crossing of the Helcaraxe.

Elerrma ‘Crowned with Stars’, a name of Taniquetil.

Elf-friends The Men of the Three Houses of Beor, Haleth, and Hador, the
Edain. In the Akallabeth and in Of the Rings of Power used of those
Numenoreans who were not estranged from the Eldar; see Elendili.
Elostirion Tallest of the towers upon Emyn Beraid, in which the palantir
was placed.

Elrond Son of Earendil and Elwing, who at the end of the First Age chose
to belong to the Firstborn, and remained in Middle-earth until the end of the
Third Age; master of Imladris (Rivendell) and keeper of Vilya, the Ring of
Air, which he had received from Gil-galad. Called Master Elrond and
Elrond Half-elven. The name means ‘Star-dome’. Sons of Elrond.

Elros Son of Earendil and Elwing, who at the end of the First Age chose to
be numbered among Men, and became the first King of Numenor (called
Tar-Minyatur), living to a very great age. The name means ‘Star-foam’.

Elu Sindarin form of Elwe.

Eluchil ‘Heir of Elu (Thingol)’, name of Dior, son of Beren and Luthien.
See Dior.

Elured Elder son of Dior; perished in the attack on Doriath by the sons of
Feanor. The name means the same as Eluchil.

Elurm Younger son of Dior; perished with his brother Elured. The name
means ‘Remembrance of Elu (Thingol)’.

Elvenhome See Eldamar.



Elves See Children of Iluvatar, Eldar, Dark Elves. Elves of the Light: see
Calaquendi.

Elwe Surnamed Singollo ‘Greymantle’; leader with his brother Olwe of the
hosts of the Teleri on the westward journey from Cuivienen, until he was
lost in Nan Elmoth; afterwards Lord of the Sindar, ruling in Doriath with
Melian; received the Silmaril from Beren; slain in Menegroth by the
Dwarves. Called (Elu) Thingol in Sindarin. See Dark Elves, Thingol.

Elxving Daughter of Dior, who escaping from Doriath with the Silmaril
wedded Earendil at the Mouths of Sirion and went with him to Valinor;
mother of Elrond and Elros. The name means ‘Star-spray’; see Lanthir
Lamath.

Emeldir Called the Man-hearted; wife of Barahir and mother of Beren; led
the women and children of the House of Beor from Dorthonion after the
Dagor Bragollach. (She was herself also a descendant of Beor the Old, and
her father’s name was Beren; this is not stated in the text.)

Emyn Beraid ‘The Tower Hills’ in the west of Eriador; see Elostirion.
Enchanted Isles The islands set by the Valar in the Great Sea eastwards of
Tol Eressea at the time of the Hiding of Valinor.

Encircling Mountains See Echoriath.

Encircling Sea See Ekkaia.

Endor ‘Middle Land’, Middle-earth.

Engwar ‘The Sickly’, one of the Elvish names for Men.

Eol Called the Dark Elf; the great smith who dwelt in Nan Elmoth, and took
Aredhel Turgon’s sister to wife; friend of the Dwarves; maker of the sword
Anglachel (Gurthang); father of Maeglin; put to death in Gondolin.

Eonwe One of the mightiest of the Maiar; called the Herald of Manwe;
leader of the host of the Valar in the attack on Morgoth at the end of the
First Age.

Ephel Brandir ‘The encircling fence of Brandir’, dwellings of the Men of
Brethil upon Amon Obel; also called the Ephel.

Ephel Duath ‘Fence of Shadow’, the mountain-range between Gondor and
Mordor; also called the Mountains of Shadow.

Erchamion ‘One-handed’, the name of Beren after his escape from
Angband.

Erech A hill in the west of Gondor, where was the Stone of Isildur (see The
Return of the King V 2).

Ered Engrin ‘The Iron Mountains’ in the far north.

Ered Gorgoroth ‘The Mountains of Terror’, northward of Nan Dungortheb;
also called the Gorgoroth.



Ered Lindon ‘The Mountains of Lindon’, another name for Ered Luin, the
Blue Mountains.

Ered Lomin ‘The Echoing Mountains’, forming the west-fence of Hithlum.
Ered Luin ‘The Blue Mountains’, also called Ered Lindon. After the
destruction at the end of the First Age Ered Luin formed the north-western
coastal range of Middle-earth.

Ered Nimrais The White Mountains ( nimrais ‘white horns’), the great range
from east to west south of the Misty Mountains.

Ered Wethrin ‘The Mountains of Shadow’, ‘The Shadowy Mountains’, the
great curving range bordering Dor-nu-Fauglith (Ard-galen) on the west and
forming the barrier between Hithlum and West Beleriand.

Eregion ‘Land of Holly’ (called by Men Hollin ); Noldorin realm in the
Second Age at the western feet of the Misty Mountains, where the Elven
Rings were made.

Ereinion ‘Scion of Kings’, the son of Fingon, known always by his surname
Gil-galad.

Erellont One of the three mariners who accompanied Earendil on his
voyages.

Eressea See Tol Eressea.

Eriador The land between the Misty Mountains and the Blue, in which lay
the Kingdom of Arnor (and also the Shire of the Hobbits).

Eru ‘The One’, ‘He that is Alone’: Iluvatar. Also in Children ofEru.
Esgalduin The river of Doriath, dividing the forests of Neldoreth and
Region, and flowing into Sirion. The name means ‘River under Veil’.

Este One of the Valier, the spouse of Irmo (Lorien); her name means ‘Rest’.
Estolad The land south of Nan Elmoth where the Men of the followings of
Beor and Marach dwelt after they crossed the Blue Mountains into
Beleriand; translated in the text as ‘the Encampment’.

Ezellohar The Green Mound of the Two Trees of Valinor; also called
Corollaire.

Faelivrin Name given to Finduilas by Gwindor.

Faithful, The See Elendili.

Falas The western coasts of Beleriand, south of Nevrast.

Falathar One of the three mariners who accompanied Earendil on his
voyages.

Falathrim The Telerin Elves of the Falas, whose lord was Cirdan.

Falmari The Sea-elves; name of the Teleri who departed from Middle-earth
and went into the West.



Feanor Eldest son of Finwe (the only child of Finwe and Miriel), half-
brother of Fingolfin and Finarfin; greatest of the Noldor, and leader in their
rebellion; deviser of the Feanorian script; maker of the Silmarils; slain in
Mithrim in the Dagornuin-Giliath. His name was Curufinwe (curu ‘skill’),
and he gave this name to his fifth son, Curufin; but he was himself known
always by his mother’s name for him, Feanaro ‘Spirit of Fire’, which was
given the Sindarin form Feanor. Chapters 5-9 and 13 passim. Elsewhere
his name occurs chiefly in the sons of Feanor.

Feanturi ‘Masters of Spirits’, the Valar Namo (Mandos) and Irmo (Forien).
Felagund The name by which King Finrod was known after the
establishment of Nargothrond; it was Dwarvish in origin ( felak-gundu
‘cave-hewer’, but translated in the text as ‘Ford of Caves’). For references
see Finrod.

Finarfin The third son of Finwe, the younger of Feanor’s half-brothers;
remained in Aman after the Exile of the Noldor and ruled the remnant of his
people in Tirion. Alone among the Noldorin princes he and his descendants
had golden hair, derived from his mother Indis, who was a Vanyarin Elf
(see Vanyar). Many other occurrences of the name of Finarfin relate to his
sons or his people.

Finduilas Daughter of Orodreth, loved by Gwindor; captured in the sack of
Nargothrond, and killed by Ores at the Crossings of Teiglin.

Fingolfin The second son of Finwe, the elder of Feanor’s half-brothers;
High King of the Noldor in Beleriand, dwelling in Hithlum; slain by
Morgoth in single combat. Many other occurrences of the name of
Fingolfin relate to his sons or his people.

Fingon The eldest son of Fingolfin, called the Valiant; rescued Maedhros
from Thangorodrim; High King of the Noldor after the death of his father;
slain by Gothmog in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.

Finrod The eldest son of Finarfin, called ‘the Faithful’ and ‘the Friend of
Men’. Founder and King of Nargothrond, whence his name Felagund;
encountered in Ossiriand the first Men to cross the Blue Mountains; rescued
by Barahir in the Dagor Bragollach; redeemed his oath to Barahir by
accompanying Beren on his quest; slain in defence of Beren in the
dungeons of Tol-in-Gaurhoth. The following references include those to
Felagund used alone:

Finwe header of the Noldor on the westward journey from Cuivienen; King
of the Noldor in Aman; father of Feanor, Fingolfin, and Finarfin; slain by
Morgoth at Formenos. Other references are to his sons or his house.

Firimar ‘Mortals’, one of the Elvish names for Men.



Firstborn, The The Elder Children of Iluvatar, the Elves.

Followers, The The Younger Children of Iluvatar, Men; translation of
Hildor.

Ford of Stones See Sam Athrad.

Fords ofAros See Arossiach.

Formenos ‘Northern Fortress’, the stronghold of Feanor and his sons in the
north of Valinor, built after the banishment of Feanor from Tirion.

Fornost ‘Northern Fortress’, Numenorean city on the North Downs in
Eriador.

Forsaken Elves See Eglath.

Frodo The Ringbearer.

Fuinur A renegade Numenorean who became mighty among the Haradrim
at the end of the Second Age.

Gabilgathol See Belegost.

Galadriel Daughter of Finarfin and sister of Finrod Felagund; one of the
leaders of the Noldorin rebellion against the Valar; wedded Celeborn of
Doriath and with him remained in Middle-earth after the end of the First
Age; keeper of Nenya, the Ring of Water, in Lothlorien.

Galathilion The White Tree of Tirion, the image of Telperion made by
Yavanna for the Vanyar and the Noldor.

Galdor Called the Tall; son of Hador Lorindol and lord of Dor-lomin after
him; father of Hurin and Huor; slain at Eithel Sirion.
galvorn The metal devised by Eol.

Gandalf The name among Men of Mithrandir, one of the Istari (Wizards);
see Olorin.

Gates of Summer A great festival of Gondolin, on the eve of which the city
was assaulted by the forces of Morgoth.

Gelion The great river of East Beleriand, rising in Himring and Mount Rerir
and fed by the rivers of Ossiriand flowing down from the Blue Mountains.
Gelmir (1) Elf of Nargothrond, brother of Gwindor, captured in the Dagor
Bragollach and afterwards put to death in front of Eithel Sirion, as a
provocation to its defenders, before the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.

Gelmir (2) Elf of the people of Angrod, who with Arminas came to
Nargothrond to warn Orodreth of its peril.

Gildor One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.

Gil-Estel ‘Star of Hope’, Sindarin name for Earendil bearing the Silmaril in
his ship Vingilot.

Gil-galad ‘Star of Radiance’, the name by which Ereinion son of Fingon



was afterwards known. After the death of Turgon he became the last High
King of the Noldor in Middle-earth, and remained in Lindon after the end
of the First Age; leader with Elendil of the Last Alliance of Men and Elves
and slain with him in combat with Sauron.

Gimilkhad Younger son of Ar-Gimilzor and Inzilbeth and father of Ar-
Pharazon, the last King of Numenor.

Gimilzor See Ar-Gimilzor.

Ginglith River in West Beleriand flowing into the Narog above
Nargothrond.

Gladden Fields Partial translation of Loeg Ningloron; the great stretches of
reeds and iris (gladden) in and about the Anduin, where Isildur was slain
and the One Ring lost.

Glaurung The first of the Dragons of Morgoth, called the Father of
Dragons; in the Dagor Bragollach, the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and the Sack of
Nargothrond; cast his spell upon Turin and upon Nienor; slain by Turin at
Cabed-en-Aras. Called also the Great Worm and the Worm of Morgoth.
Glingal ‘Hanging Flame’, the image of Laurelin made by Turgon in
Gondolin.

Glirhuin A minstrel of Brethil.

Gloredhel Daughter of Hador Lorindol of Dor-lomin and sister of Galdor;
wedded Haldir of Brethil.

Glorfindel Elf of Gondolin, who fell to his death in Cirith Thoronath in
combat with a Balrog after the escape from the sack of the city. The name
means ‘Golden-haired’.

Golodhrim The Noldor. Golodh was the Sindarin form of Quenya Noldo,
and -rim a collective plural ending; cf. Annonin-Gelydh, the Gate of the
Noldor.

Gondolin ‘The Hidden Rock’ (see Ondolinde ), secret city of King Turgon
surrounded by the Encircling Mountains (Echoriath).

Gondolindrim The people of Gondolin.

Gondor ‘Land of Stone’, name of the southern Numenorean kingdom in
Middle-earth, established by Isildur and Anarion. City of Gondor: Minas
Tirith.

Gonnhirrim ‘Masters of Stone’, a Sindarin name for the Dwarves.

Gorgoroth (1) See Ered Gorgoroth.

Gorgoroth (2) A plateau in Mordor, between the converging Mountains of
Shadow and Mountains of Ash.

Gorlim Called the Unhappy; one of the twelve companions of Barahir on
Dorthonion, who was ensnared by a phantom of his wife Eilinel and



revealed to Sauron the hiding-place of Barahir.

Gorthaur The name of Sauron in Sindarin.

Gorthol ‘Dread Helm’, the name that Turin took as one of the Two Captains
in the land of Dor-Cuarthol.

Gothmog Lord of Balrogs, high-captain of Angband, slayer of Feanor,
Fingon, and Ecthelion. (The same name was borne in the Third Age by the
Lieutenant of Minas Morgul; The Return of the King V 6.)

Greater Gelion One of the two tributary branches of the river Gelion in the
north, rising in Mount Rerir.

Great Lands Middle-earth.

Great River See Anduin.

Green-elves Translation of Laiquendi; the Nandorin Elves of Ossiriand.
Greenwood the Great The great forest east of the Misty Mountains,
afterwards named Mirkwood.

Grey-elven tongue See Sindarin.

Grey-elves See Sindar.

Grey Havens See (The) Havens, Mithlond.

Greymantle See Singollo, Thingol.

Grinding Ice See Helcaraxe.

Grond The great mace of Morgoth, with which he fought Fingolfin; called
the Hammer of the Underworld. The battering-ram used against the Gate of
Minas Tirith was named after it ( The Return of the King V 4).

Guarded Plain See Talath Dirnen.

Guarded Realm See Valinor.

Guilin Father of Gelmir and Gwindor, Elves of Nargothrond.

Gundor Younger son of Hador Lorindol, lord of Dor-lomin, slain with his
father at Eithel Sirion in the Dagor Bragollach.

Gurthang ‘Iron of Death’, name of Beleg’s sword Anglachel after it was
reforged for Turin in Nargothrond, and from which he was named
Mormegil.

Gwaith-i-Mfrdain ‘People of the Jewel-smiths’, name of the fellowship of
craftsmen in Eregion, greatest of whom was Celebrimbor son of Curufin.
Gwindor Elf of Nargothrond, brother of Gelmir; enslaved in Angband, but
escaped and aided Beleg in the rescue of Turin; brought Turin to
Nargothrond; loved Finduilas Orodreth’s daughter; slain in the Battle of
Tumhalad.

Hadhodrond The Sindarin name of Khazad-dum (Moria).

Hador Called Lorindol ‘Goldenhead’, also Hador the Golden-haired; lord



of Dor-lomin, vassal of Fingolfin; father of Galdor father of Hurin; slain at
Eithel Sirion in the Dagor Bragollach. The House of Hador was called the
Third House of the Edain. House of, People of, Hador. Helm of Hador: see
Dragon-helm of Dor-lomin.

Haladin The second people of Men to enter Beleriand; afterwards called the
People ofHaleth, dwelling in the Forest of Brethil, also the Men ofBrethil.
Haldad Leader of the Haladin in their defence against the attack on them by
Ores in Thargelion, and slain there; father of the Lady Haleth.

Haldan Son of Haidar; leader of the Haladin after the death of the Lady
Haleth.

Haidar Son of Haldad of the Haladin, and brother of the Lady Haleth; slain
with his father in the Ore-raid on Thargelion.

Haldir Son of Halmir of Brethil; wedded Gloredhel, daughter of Hador of
Dor-lomin; slain in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.

Haleth Called the Lady Haleth; leader of the Haladin (who were named
from her the People of Haleth) from Thargelion to the lands west of Sirion.
House of, People of, Haleth.

Half-elven Translation of Sindarin Peredhel, plural Peredhil, applied to
Elrond and Elros, and to Earendil.

Half lings Translation of Periannath (Hobbits).

Halls of Awaiting The Halls of Mandos.

Halmir Lord of the Haladin, son of Haldan; with Beleg of Doriath defeated
the Ores that came south from the Pass of Sirion after the Dagor
Bragollach.

Handir Son of Haldir and Gloredhel, father of Brandir the Lame; lord of the
Haladin after Haldir’s death; slain in Brethil in battle with Ores.

Haradrim The Men of Harad (‘the South’), the lands south of Mordor.
Hareth Daughter of Halmir of Brethil; wedded Galdor of Dorlomin; mother
of Hurin and Huor.

Hathaldir Called the Young; one of the twelve companions of Barahir on
Dorthonion.

Hathol Father of Hador Lorindol.

Haudh-en-Arwen ‘The Ladybarrow’, the burial-mound of Haleth in the
Forest of Brethil.

Haudh-en-Elleth The mound in which Finduilas was buried, near the
Crossings of Teiglin.

Haudh-en-Ndengin ‘The Mound of Slain’ in the desert of Anfauglith, where
were piled the bodies of the Elves and Men that died in the Nirnaeth
Arnoediad.



Haudh-en-Nirnaeth ‘The Mound of Tears’, another name of Haudh-en-
Ndengin.

Havens, The Brithombar and Eglarest on the coast of Beleriand: The
Havens of Sirion at the end of the First Age. The Grey Havens ( Mithlond )
in the Gulf of Lhun. Alqualonde, the Haven of the Swans or Swanhaven, is
also called simply The Haven.

Helcar The Inland Sea in the northeast of Middle-earth, where once stood
the mountain of the lamp of Illuin; the mere of Cuivienen where the first
Elves awoke is described as a bay in this sea.

Helcaraxe The strait between Araman and Middle-earth; also referred to as
the Grinding Ice.

Helevorn ‘Black Glass’, a lake in the north of Thargelion, below Mount
Rerir, where Caranthir dwelt.

Helluin The star Sirius.

Herumor A renegade Numenorean who became mighty among the
Haradrim at the end of the Second Age.

Herunumen ‘Lord of the West’, Quenya name of Ar-Adunakhor.

Hidden Kingdom Name given both to Doriath, and to Gondolin.

High-elven See Quenya.

High Elves See Eldar.

High Faroth See Taur-en-Faroth.

Hildor ‘The Followers’, ‘The Aftercomers’, Elvish name for Men, as the
Younger Children of Iluvatar.

Hildorien The land in the east of Middle-earth where the first Men ( Hildor )
awoke.

Himlad ‘Cool Plain’, the region where Celegorm and Curufin dwelt south
of the Pass of Aglon.

Himring The great hill west of Maglor’s Gap on which was the stronghold
of Maedhros; translated in the text as ‘Ever-cold’.

Hirilorn The great beech-tree in Doriath with three trunks, in which Luthien
was imprisoned. The name means ‘Tree of the Lady’.

Hisilome ‘Land of Mist’, Quenya name of Hithlum.

Hithaeglir ‘Line of Misty Peaks’: the Misty Mountains, or Mountains of
Mist. (The form Hithaeglin on the map to The Lord of the Rings is an error.)
Hither Lands Middle-earth (also called the Outer Lands).

Hithlum ‘Land of Mist’, the region bounded on the east and south by Ered
Wethrin and on the west by Ered Lomin; see Hisilome.

Hollin See Eregion.

Hollowbold Translation of Nogrod: ‘hollow dwelling’ (early English bold,



noun related to the verb build).

Huan The great wolfhound of Valinor that Orome gave to Celegorm; friend
and helper of Beren and Luthien; slew and slain by Carcharoth. The name
means 'great dog, hound 5 .

Hunthor A Man of the Haladin in Brethil who accompanied Turin in his
attack on Glaurung at Cabed-en-Aras and was killed there by a falling
stone.

Huor Son of Galdor of Dor-lomin, husband of Rian and father of Tuor;
went to Gondolin with Hurin his brother; slain in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.
Hurin Called Thalion The Steadfast’, The Strong’; son of Galdor of Dor-
Domin, husband of Morwen and father of Turin and Nienor; lord of Dor-
lomin, vassal of Fingon. Went with Huor his brother to Gondolin; captured
by Morgoth in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad and set upon Thangorodrim for
many years; after his release slew Mim in Nargothrond and brought the
Nauglamir to King Thingol.

Hyarmentir The highest mountain in the regions south of Valinor.

Iant Iaur ‘The Old Bridge’ over the Esgalduin on the northern borders of
Doriath; also called the Bridge of Esgalduin.

Ibun One of the sons of Mim the Petty-dwarf.

Idril Called Celebrindal ‘Silverfoot’; the daughter (and only child) of
Turgon and Elenwe; wife of Tuor, mother of Earendil, with whom she
escaped from Gondolin to the Mouths of Sirion; departed thence with Tuor
into the West.

Illuin One of the Lamps of the Valar made by Aule. Illuin stood in the
northern part of Middle-earth, and after the overthrow of the mountain by
Melkor the Inland Sea of Helcar was formed there.

Ilmare A Maia, the handmaid of Varda.

Ilmen The region above the air where the stars are.

Iluvatar ‘Father of All’, Eru.

Imlach Father of Amlach.

Imladris ‘Rivendell’ (literally, ‘Deep Dale of the Cleft’), Elrond’s dwelling
in a valley of the Misty Mountains.

Indis Vanyarin Elf, close kin of Ingwe; second wife of Finwe, mother of
Fingolfin and Finarfin.

Ingwe Leader of the Vanyar, the first of the three hosts of the Eldar on the
westward journey from Cuivienen. In Aman he dwelt upon Taniquetil, and
was held High King of all the Elves.

Inziladun Elder son of Ar-Gimilzor and Inzilbeth; afterwards named Tar-



Palantir.

Inzilbeth Queen of Ar-Gimilzor; of the house of the lords of Andunie.

Irmo The Vala usually named Lorien, the place of his dwelling.

Irmo means ‘Desirer’ or ‘Master of Desire’.

Iron Mountains See Ered Engrin.

Isengard Translation (to represent the language of Rohan) of the Elvish
name Angrenost.

Isil Quenya name of the Moon.

Isildur Elder son of Elendil, who with his father and his brother Anarion
escaped from the Drowning of Numenor and founded in Middle-earth the
Numenorean realms in exile; lord of Minas Ithil; cut the Ruling Ring from
Sauron’s hand; slain by Ores in the Anduin when the Ring slipped from his
finger. Heirs of Isildur. Heir of Isildur = Aragorn.

Istari The Wizards. See Curunir, Saruman; Mithrandir, Gandalf, Olorin;
Radagast.

Ivrin The lake and falls beneath Ered Wethrin where the river Narog rose.
Pools of IvrinSee Eithel Ivrin.

kelvar An Elvish word retained in the speeches of Yavanna and Manwe in
Chapter 2: ‘animals, living things that move’.

Kementari ‘Queen of the Earth’, a title of Yavanna.

Khazad The name of the Dwarves in their own language (. Khuzdul ).
Khazad-dum The great mansions of the Dwarves of Durin’s race in the
Misty Mountains ( Hadhodrond , Moria ). See Khazad; dum is probably a
plural or collective, meaning ‘excavations, halls, mansions’.

Khim Son of Mim the Petty-dwarf, slain by one of Turin’s outlaw band.
King’s Men Numenoreans hostile to the Eldar and the Elendili.

Kinslaying, The The slaying of the Teleri by the Noldor at Alqualonde.

Ladros The lands to the northeast of Dorthonion that were granted by the
Noldorin Kings to the Men of the House of Beor.

Laer Cu Beleg ‘The Song of the Great Bow’, made by Turin at Eithel Ivrin
in memory of Beleg Cuthalion.

Laiquendi ‘The Green-elves’ of Ossiriand.

Lalaith ‘Laughter’, daughter of Hurin and Morwen who died in childhood.
Lammoth ‘The Great Echo’, region north of the Firth of Drengist, named
from the echoes of Morgoth’s cry in his struggle with Ungoliant.

Land of Shadow See Mordor.

Land of the Dead that Live See Dor Firn-i-Guinar.



Land of the Star Numenor.

Lanthir Lamath 'Waterfall of Echoing Voices’, where Dior had his house in
Ossiriand, and after which his daughter Elwing (‘Star-spray’) was named.
Last Alliance The league made at the end of the Second Age between
Elendil and Gil-galad to defeat Sauron.

Laurelin ‘Song of Gold’, the younger of the Two Trees of Valinor.

Lay of Leithian The long poem concerning the lives of Beren and Luthien
from which the prose account in The Silmarillion was derived. Leithian is
translated ‘Release from Bondage’.

Legolin The third of the tributaries of Gelion in Ossiriand. lembas Sindarin
name of the waybread of the Eldar (from earlier lenn-mbass ‘journey-
bread’; in Quenya coimas ‘life-bread’).

Lenwe The leader of the Elves from the host of the Teleri who refused to
cross the Misty Mountains on the westward journey from Cuivienen (the
Nandor); father of Denethor.

Lhun River in Eriador flowing into the sea in the Gulf of Lhun.

Linaexven ‘Lake of birds’, the great mere in Nevrast.

Lindon A name of Ossiriand in the First Age. After the tumults at the end of
the First Age the name Lindon was retained for the lands west of the Blue
Mountains that still remained above the Sea.

Lindorie Mother of Inzilbeth.

Little Gelion One of the two tributary branches of the river Gelion in the
north, rising in the Hill of Himring.

Loeg Ningloron ‘Pools of the golden water-flowers’; see Gladden Fields,
lomelindi Quenya word meaning ‘dusk-singers’, nightingales.

Lomion ‘Son of Twilight’, the Quenya name that Aredhel gave to Maeglin.
Lonely Isle See Tol Eressea.

Lord of Waters See Ulmo.

Lords of the West See Valar.

Lorellin The lake in Lorien in Valinor where the Vala Este sleeps by day.
Lorgan Chief of the Easterling Men in Hithlum after the Nirnaeth
Arnoediad, by whom Tuor was enslaved.

Lorien (1) The name of the gardens and dwelling-place of the Vala Irmo,
who was himself usually called Lorien.

Lorien (2) The land ruled by Celeborn and Galadriel between the rivers
Celebrant and Anduin. Probably the original name of this land was altered
to the form of the Quenya name Lorien of the gardens of the Vala Irmo in
Valinor. In Lothlorien the Sindarin word loth ‘flower’ is prefixed.

Lorindol ‘Goldenhead’; s eeHador.



Losgar The place of the burning of the ships of the Teleri by Feanor, at the
mouth of the Firth of Drengist.

Lothlann ‘The wide and empty’, the great plain north of the March of
Maedhros.

Lothlorien ‘Lorien of the Blossom’; see Lorien (2).

Luinil Name of a star (one shining with a blue light).

Lumbar Name of a star.

Luthien The daughter of King Thingol and Melian the Maia, who after the
fulfilment of the Quest of the Silmaril and the death of Beren chose to
become mortal and to share his fate. See Tinuviel.

Mablung Elf of Doriath, chief captain of Thingol, friend of Turin; called ‘of
the Heavy Hand’ (which is the meaning of the name Mablung ); slain in
Menegroth by the Dwarves.

Maedhros The eldest son of Feanor, called the Tall; rescued by Fingon from
Thangorodrim; held the Hill of Himring and the lands about; formed the
Union of Maedhros that ended in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad; bore one of the
Silmarils with him to his death at the end of the First Age.

Maeglin ‘Sharp Glance’, son of Eol and Aredhel Turgon’s sister, born in
Nan Elmoth; became mighty in Gondolin, and betrayed it to Morgoth; slain
in the sack of the city by Tuor. See Lomion.

Maglor The second son of Feanor, a great singer and minstrel; held the
lands called Maglor’s Gap; at the end of the First Age seized with
Maedhros the two Silmarils that remained in Middle-earth, and cast the one
that he took into the Sea.

Maglor ’s Gap The region between the northern arms of Gelion where there
were no hills of defence against the North.

Magor Son of Malach Aradan; leader of the Men of the following of
Marach who entered West Beleriand.

Mahal The name given to Aule by the Dwarves.

Mahanaxar The Ring of Doom outside the gates of Valmar, in which were
set the thrones of the Valar where they sat in council.

Mahtan A great smith of the Noldor, father of Nerdanel the wife of Feanor.
Malar Ainur of lesser degree than the Valar (singular Maia).

Malach Son of Marach; given the Elvish name Aradan.

Malduin A tributary of the Teiglin; the name probably means ‘Yellow
River’.

Malinalda ‘Tree of Gold’, a name of Laurelin.

Mandos The place of the dwelling in Aman of the Vala properly called



Namo, the Judge, though this name was seldom used, and he himself was
usually referred to as Mandos. Named as Vala. Named as the place of his
dwelling (including Halls of Mandos; also Halls of Awaiting, Houses of the
Dead). With reference to the Doom of the Noldor and the Curse of Mandos.
Manwe The chief of the Valar, called also Sulimo, the Elder King, the Ruler
ofArda.

Marach Leader of the third host of Men to enter Beleriand, ancestor of
Hador Lorindol.

March of Maedhros The open lands to the north of the head-waters of the
river Gelion, held by Maedhros and his brothers against attack on East
Beleriand; also called the eastern March.

Mardil Called the Faithful; the first Ruling Steward of Gondor.
Mar-nu-Falmar The Land under the Waves’, name of Numenor after the
Downfall.

Melian A Maia, who left Valinor and came to Middle-earth; afterwards the
Queen of King Thingol in Doriath, about which she set a girdle of
enchantment, the Girdle of Melian; mother of Luthien, and foremother of
Elrond and Elros.

Melkor The Quenya name for the great rebellious Vala, the beginning of
evil, in his origin the mightiest of the Ainur; afterwards named Morgoth,
Bauglir, the Dark Lord, the Enemy, etc. The meaning of Melkor was 'He
who arises in Might’; the Sindarin form was Belegur, but it was never used,
save in a deliberately altered form Belegurth 'Great Death’. Passim (after
the rape of the Silmarils usually called Morgoth).

MenAtani, Children oflluvatar, Easterlings.

Menegroth ‘The Thousand Caves’, the hidden halls of Thingol and Melian
on the river Esgalduin in Doriath.

Meneldil Son of Anarion, King of Gondor.

Menelmacar ‘Swordsman of the Sky’, the constellation Orion.

Meneltarma 'Pillar of Heaven’, the mountain in the midst of Numenor,
upon whose summit was the Hallow of Eru Iluvatar.

Meres of Twilight See Aelin-uial.

Mereth Aderthad The 'Feast of Reuniting’ held by Fingolfin near the Pools
of Ivrin.

Mickleburg Translation of Belegost: ‘great fortress’.

Middle-earth The lands to the east of the Great Sea; also called the Hither
Lands, the Outer Lands, the Great Lands, and Endor. Passim.

Mim The Petty-dwarf, in whose house ( Bar-en-Danwedh ) on Amon Rudh
Turin dwelt with the outlaw band, and by whom their lair was betrayed to



the Ores; slain by Hurin in Nargothrond.

Minas Anor ‘Tower of the Sun’ (also simply Anor), afterwards called Minas
Tirith; the city of Anarion, at the feet of Mount Mindolluin.

Minas Ithil ‘Tower of the Moon’, afterwards called Minas Morgul; the city
of Isildur, built on a shoulder of the Ephel Duath.

Minas Morgul ‘Tower of Sorcery’ (also simply Morgul), name of Minas
Ithil after its capture by the Ringwraiths.

Minastir See Tar-Minastir.

Minas Tirith (1) ‘Tower of Watch’, built by Finrod Felagund on Tol Sirion;
see Tol-in-Gaurhoth.

Minas Tirith (2) Fater name of Minas Anor. Called the City ofGondor.
Mindeb A tributary of Sirion, between Dimbar and the Forest of Neldoreth.
Mindolluin ‘Towering Blue-head’, the great mountain behind Minas Anor.
Mindon Eldalieva ‘Fofty Tower of the Eldalie’, the tower of Ingwe in the
city of Tirion; also simply the Mindon.

Muriel (1) The first wife of Finwe, mother of Feanor; died after Feanor’s
birth. Called Serinde ‘the Broideress’.

Muriel (2) Daughter of Tar-Palantir, forced into marriage by Ar-Pharazon,
and as his queen named Ar-Zimraphel; also called Tar-Miriel.

Mirkwood See Greenwood the Great.

Misty Mountains See Hithaeglir.

Mithlond ‘The Grey Havens’, harbours of the Elves on the Gulf of Fhun;
also referred to as the Havens.

Mithrandir ‘The Grey Pilgrim’, Elvish name of Gandalf (Olorin), one of the
Istari (Wizards).

Mithrim The name of the great lake in the east of Hithlum, and also of the
region about it and of the mountains to the west, separating Mithrim from
Dor-lomin. The name was originally that of the Sindarin Elves who dwelt
there.

Mordor ‘The Black Fand’, also called the Land of Shadow; Sauron’s realm
east of the mountains of the Ephel Duath.

Morgoth ‘The Black Enemy’, name of Melkor, first given to him by Feanor
after the rape of the Silmarils and thereafter passim. See Melkor.

Morgul See Minas Morgul.

Moria ‘The Black Chasm’, later name for Khazad-dum (Hadhodrond).
Moriquendi ‘Elves of the Darkness’; see Dark Elves.

Mormegil ‘The Black Sword’, name given to Turin as captain of the host of
Nargothrond; see Gurthang.

Morwen Daughter of Baragund (nephew of Barahir, the father of Beren);



wife of Hurin and mother of Turin and Nienor; called Eledhwen (translated
in the text as ‘Elfsheen’) and the Lady of Dor-lomin.

Mountain of Fire See Orodruin.

Mountains : of Aman, of Defence, see Pelori; of the East, see Orocarni; of
Iron, see Ered Engrin; of Mist, see Hithaeglir; of Mithrim, see Mithrim; of
Shadow, see Ered Wethrin and Ephel Duath; of Terror, see Ered Gorgoroth.
Mount Doom See Amon Amarth.

Music of the Amur See Ainulindale.

Nahar The horse of the Vala Orome, said by the Eldar to be so named on
account of his voice.

Namo A Vala, one of the Aratar; usually named Mandos, the place of his
dwelling. Namo means ‘Ordainer, Judge 5 .

Nandor Said to mean ‘Those who turn back’: the Nandor were those Elves
from the host of the Teleri who refused to cross the Misty Mountains on the
westward journey from Cuivienen, but of whom a part, led by Denethor,
came long afterwards over the Blue Mountains and dwelt in Ossiriand (the
Green-elves).

Nan Dungortheb Also Dungortheb; translated in the text as ‘Valley of
Dreadful Death’. The valley between the precipices of Ered Gorgoroth and
the Girdle of Melian.

Nan Elmoth The forest east of the river Celon where Elwe (Thingol) was
enchanted by Melian and lost; afterwards the dwelling-place of Eol.
Nan-tathren ‘Willow-vale’, translated as ‘the Land of Willows’, where the
river Narog flowed into Sirion. In Treebeard’s song in The Two Towers III 4
Quenya forms of the name are used: in the willow-meads of Tasarinan;
Nan-tasarion.

Nargothrond ‘The great underground fortress on the river Narog’, founded
by Finrod Felagund and destroyed by Glaurung; also the realm of
Nargothrond extending east and west of the Narog.

Nam i Hin Hurin ‘The Tale of the Children of Hurin’, the long lay from
which Chapter 21 was derived; ascribed to the poet Dirhaval, a Man who
lived at the Havens of Sirion in the days of Earendil and perished in the
attack of the sons of Feanor.

Nam signifies a tale made in verse, but to be spoken and not sung.

Narog The chief river of West Beleriand, rising at Ivrin under Ered Wethrin
and flowing into Sirion in Nan-tathren.

Narsil The sword of Elendil, made by Telchar of Nogrod, that was broken
when Elendil died in combat with Sauron; from the shards it was reforged



for Aragorn and named Anduril.

Narsilion The Song of the Sun and Moon.

Narya One of the Three Rings of the Elves, the Ring of Fire or the Red
Ring; borne by Cirdan and afterwards by Mithrandir.

Nauglamir ‘The Necklace of the Dwarves’, made for Finrod Felagund by
the Dwarves, brought by Hurin out of Nargothrond to Thingol, and the
cause of his death.

Naugrim ‘The Stunted People’, Sindarin name for the Dwarves.

Nazgul See Ring-wraiths.

Necklace of the Dwarves See Nauglamir.

Neithan Name given to himself by Turin among the outlaws, translated as
‘The Wronged’ (literally ‘one who is deprived’).

Neldoreth The great beech-forest forming the northern part of Doriath;
called Taur-na-Neldor in Treebeard’s song in The Two Towers III 4.

Nenar Name of a star.

Nen Girith ‘Shuddering Water’, name given to Dimrost, the falls of
Celebros in the Forest of Brethil.

Nenning River in West Beleriand, reaching the sea at the Haven of Eglarest.
Nenuial ‘Fake of Twilight’, in Eriador, where the river Baranduin rose, and
beside which the city of Annuminas was built.

Nenya One of the Three Rings of the Elves, the Ring of Water, borne by
Galadriel; also called the Ring of Adamant.

Nerdanel Called the Wise; daughter of Mahtan the smith, wife of Feanor.
Nessa One of the Valier, the sister of Orome and spouse of Tulkas.

Nevrast The region west of Dor-lomin, beyond Ered Fomin, where Turgon
dwelt before his departure to Gondolin. The name, meaning ‘Hither Shore’,
was originally that of all the northwestern coast of Middle-earth (the
opposite being Haerast ‘the Far Shore’, the coast of Aman).

Nienna One of the Valier, numbered among the Aratar; Fady of pity and
mourning, the sister of Mandos and Forien.

Nienor ‘Mourning’, the daughter of Hurin and Morwen and sister of Turin;
spell-bound by Glaurung at Nargothrond and in ignorance of her past
wedded Turin in Brethil in her name Niniel; cast herself into the Teiglin.
Nimbrethil Birch-woods in Arvernien in the south of Beleriand. Cf. Bilbo’s
song at Rivendell: ‘He built a boat of timber felled in Nimbrethil to journey
in ...’(The Fellowship of the Ring II 1).

Nimloth (1) The White Tree of Numenor, of which a fruit taken by Isildur
before it was felled grew into the White Tree of Minas Ithil. Nimloth ‘White
Blossom’ is the Sindarin form of Quenya Ninquelote, one of the names of



Telperion.

Nimloth (2) Elf of Doriath who wedded Dior Thingol’s Heir; mother of
Elwing; slain in Menegroth in the attack by the sons of Feanor.

Nimphelos The great pearl given by Thingol to the lord of the Dwarves of
Belegost.

Niniel ‘Tear-maiden’, the name that Turin, ignorant of their relationship,
gave to his sister; see Nienor.

Ninquelote ‘White Blossom’, a name of Telperion; see Nimloth (1).
niphredil A white flower that bloomed in Doriath in starlight when Futhien
was born. It grew also on Cerin Amroth in Lothlorien ( The Fellowship of
the Ring II 6).

Nirnaeth Arnoediad ‘Tears Unnumbered’ (also simply the Nirnaeth), the
name given to the ruinous fifth battle in the Wars of Beleriad.

Nivrim That part of Doriath that lay on the west bank of Sirion.

Noegyth Nibin ‘Petty-dwarves (see also under Dwarves).

Nogrod One of the two cities of the Dwarves in the Blue Mountains;
translation into Sindarin of Dwarvish Tumunzahar. See Hollowbold.
Noldolante ‘The Fall of the Noldor’, a lament made by Maglor son of
Feanor.

Noldor The Deep Elves, the second host of the Eldar on the westward
journey from Cuivienen, led by Finwe. The name (Quenya Noldo, Sindarin
Golodh ) meant ‘the Wise’ (but wise in the sense of possessing knowledge,
not in the sense of possessing sagacity, sound judgement). For the language
of the Noldor see Quenya.

Nom, Nomin ‘Wisdom’ and ‘the Wise’, the names that the Men of Beor’s
following gave to Finrod and his people in their own tongue.

North Downs In Eriador, where was built the Numenorean city of Fornost.
Nulukkizdm Dwarvish name of Nargothrond.

Numenor (In full Quenya form Numenor e.) ‘Westernesse’, ‘Westland’, the
great island prepared by the Valar as a dwelling-place for the Edain after the
ending of the First Age. Called also Anadune, Andor, Elenna, the Land of
the Star, and after its downfall Akallabeth, Atalante, and Mar-nu-Falmar.
Numenoreans The Men of Numenor, called also Dunedain.

Nurtale Valinoreva ‘The Hiding of Valinor’.

Ohtar ‘Warrior’, esquire of Isildur, who brought the shards of Elendil’s
sword to Imladris.

Oiolosse ‘Ever-snow-white’, the most common name among the Eldar for
Taniquetil, rendered into Sindarin as Amon Uilos; but according to the



Valaquenta it was ‘the uttermost tower of Taniquetil 5 .

Oiomure A region of mists near to the Helcaraxe.

Olorin A Maia, one of the Istari (Wizards); Mithrandir, Gandalf, and cf. The
Two Tower IV 5: ‘Olorin I was in my youth in the West that is forgotten 5 .
olvar An Elvish word retained in the speeches of Yavanna and Manwe in
Chapter 2, meaning ‘growing things with roots in the earth 5 .

Olwe Leader together with his brother Elwe (Thingol) of the hosts of the
Teleri on the westward journey from Cuivienen; lord of the Teleri of
Alqualonde in Aman.

Ondolinde ‘Stone Song 5 , the original Quenya name of Gondolin.

Ores Creatures of Morgoth.

Orfalch Echor The great ravine through the Encircling Mountains by which
Gondolin was approached.

Ormal One of the Lamps of the Valar made by Aule. Ormal stood in the
south of Middle-earth.

Orocarni The Mountains of the East of Middle-earth (the name means ‘the
Red Mountains 5 ).

Orodreth The second son of Finarfin; warden of the tower of Minas Tirith
on Tol Sirion; King of Nargothrond after the death of Finrod his brother;
father of Finduilas; slain in the Battle of Tumhalad.

Orodruin ‘Mountain of Blazing Fire 5 in Mordor, in which Sauron forged the
Ruling Ring; called also Amon Amarth ‘Mount Doom 5 .

Orome A Vala, one of the Aratar; the great hunter, leader of the Elves from
Cuivienen, spouse of Vana. The name means ‘Horn-blowing 5 or ‘Sound of
Horns 5 , cf. Valaroma; in The Lord of the Rings it appears in the Sindarin
form Araw.

Oromet A hill near the haven of Andunie in the west of Numenor, on which
was built the tower of Tar-Minastir.

Orthanc ‘Forked Height 5 , the Numenorean tower in the Circle of Isengard.
Osgiliath ‘Fortress of the Stars 5 , the chief city of ancient Gondor, on either
side of the river Anduin.

Osse A Maia, vassal of Ulmo, with whom he entered the waters of Arda;
lover and instructor of the Teleri.

Ossiriand ‘Land of Seven Rivers 5 (these being Gelion and its tributaries
flowing down from the Blue Mountains), the land of the Green-elves. Cf.
Treebeard’s song in The Two Towers III 4: ‘I wandered in Summer in the
elm-woods of Ossiriand. Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the
Seven Rivers of Ossir! 5 See Lindon.

Ost-in-Edhil ‘Fortress of the Eldar 5 , the city of the Elves in Eregion.



Outer Lands Middle-earth (also called the Hither Lands).

Outer Sea See Ekkaia.

Palantiri Those that watch from afar’, the seven Seeing Stones brought by
Elendil and his sons from Numenor; made by Feanor in Aman (see The Two
Towers III 11).

Pelargir ‘Garth of Royal Ships’, the Numenorean haven above the delta of
Anduin.

Pelori ‘The fencing or defensive heights’, called also the Mountains of
Aman and the Mountains of Defence, raised by the Valar after the
destruction of their dwelling on Almaren; ranging in a crescent from north
to south, close to the eastern shores of Aman.

People ofHaleth See Haladin and Haleth.

Periannath The Halflings (Hobbits).

Petty-dwarves Translation of Noegyth Nibin. See also under Dwarves.
Pharazon See Ar-Pharazdn.

Prophecy of the North The Doom of the Noldor, uttered by Mandos on the
coast of Araman.

Quendi Original Elvish name for Elves (of every kind, including the Avari),
meaning ‘Those that speak with voices’.

Quenta Silmarillion ‘The History of the Silmarils.’

Quenya The ancient tongue, common to all Elves, in the form that it took in
Valinor; brought to Middle-earth by the Noldorin exiles, but abandoned by
them as a daily speech, especially after the edict of King Thingol against its
use; see especially 128-9, 149-50. Not named as such in this book, but
referred to as Eldarin; High Eldarin; High-elven; the tongue of Valinor; the
speech of the Elves of Valinor; the tongue of the Noldor; the High Speech of
the West.

Radagast One of the Istari (Wizards).

Radhruin One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.

Ragnor One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.

Ramdal ‘Wall’s End’ (see Andram), where the dividing fall across Beleriand
ceased.

Rana ‘The Wanderer’, a name of the Moon among the Noldor.

Rathloriel ‘Golden-bed’, later name for the river Ascar, after the treasure of
Doriath was sunk in it.

Rauros ‘Roaring Spray’, the great falls in the river Anduin.



Red Ring, The See Narya.

Region The dense forest forming the southern part of Doriath.

Rerir Mountain to the north of Lake Helevorn, where rose the greater of the
two tributary branches of Gelion.

Rhovanion ‘Wilderland’, the wide region east of the Misty Mountains.
Rhudaur Region in the north-east of Eriador.

Rian Daughter of Belegund (nephew of Barahir, the father of Beren); wife
of Huor and mother of Tuor; after Huor’s death died of grief on the Haudh-
en-Ndengin.

Ringil The sword of Fingolfin.

Ring of Doom See Mahanaxar.

Rings of Power The One Ring, Great Ring, or Ruling Ring: Three Rings of
the Elves : (see also Narya, the Ring of Fire, Nenya, the Ring of Adamant,
and Vdya, the Ring of Sapphire). Seven Rings of the Dwarves. Nine Rings of
Men.

Ringwil The stream that flowed into the river Narog at Nargothrond.
Ring-wraiths The slaves of the Nine Rings of Men and chief servants of
Sauron; also called Nazgul and Ulairi.

Rivendell Translation of Imladris.

Rivil Stream falling northwards from Dorthonion and flowing into Sirion in
the Fen of Serech. Rivil’s Well.

Rochallor The horse of Fingolfin.

Rohan The Horse-country’, later name in Gondor for the great grassy plain
formerly called Calenardhon.

Rohirrim The Horse-lords’ of Rohan.

Romenna Haven on the east coast of Numenor.

Rothinzil Adunaic (Numenorean) name of Earendil’s ship Vingilot, with the
same meaning, 'Foam-flower’.

Rumil A Noldorin sage of Tirion, the first deviser of written characters (cf.
The Lord of the Rings Appendix E II); to him is attributed the Ainulindale.

Saeros Nandorin Elf, one of the chief counsellors of Thingol in Doriath;
insulted Turin in Menegroth, and by him pursued to his death.

Salmar A Maia who entered Arda with Ulmo; maker of Ulmo’s great horns,
the Ulumuri.

Sam Athrad 'Ford of Stones’, where the Dwarf-road from Nogrod and
Belegost crossed the river Gelion.

Saruman ‘Man of Skill’, the name among Men of Curunir (which it
translates), one of the Istari (Wizards).



Sauron The Abhorred’ (in Sindarin called Gorthaur ); greatest of the
servants of Melkor, in his origin a Maia of Aule.

Secondborn, The The Younger Children of Iluvatar, Men.

Seeing Stones See Palantiri.

Serech The great fen north of the Pass of Sirion, where the river Rivil
flowed in from Dorthonion.

seregon 'Blood of Stone’, a plant with deep red flowers that grew on Amon
Rudh.

Serinde The Broideress’; see Miriel (1).

Seven Fathers of the Dwarves See Dwarves.

Seven Stones See Palantiri.

Shadowy Mountains See Ered Wethrin.

Shepherds of the Trees Ents.

Sickle of the Valar See Valacirca.

Silmarien Daughter of Tar-Elendil, the fourth King of Numenor; mother of
the first lord of Andunie and ancestress of Elendil and his sons Isildur and
Anarion.

Silmarils The three jewels made by Feanor before the destruction of the
Two Trees of Valinor, and filled with their light.

Silpion A name of Telperion.

Silvan Elves Also called Woodland Elves. They appear to have been in
origin those Nandorin Elves who never passed west of the Misty
Mountains, but remained in the Vale of Anduin and in Greenwood the
Great; see Nandor.

Sindar The Grey-elves. The name was applied to all the Elves of Telerin
origin whom the returning Noldor found in Beleriand, save for the Green-
elves of Ossiriand. The Noldor may have devised this name because the
first Elves of this origin whom they met with were in the north, under the
grey skies and mists about Lake Mithrim (see Mithrim ); or perhaps because
the Grey-elves were not of the Light (of Valinor) nor yet of the Dark
(Avari), but were Elves of the Twilight. But it was held to refer to Elwe’s
name Thingol (Quenya Sindacollo, Singollo 'Grey-cloak’), since he was
acknowledged high king of all the land and its peoples. The Sindar called
themselves Edhil, plural Edhel.

Sindarin The Elvish tongue of Beleriand, derived from the common Elvish
speech but greatly changed through long ages from Quenya of Valinor;
acquired by the Noldorin exiles in Beleriand. Called also the Grey-elven
tongue, the tongue of the Elves of Beleriand, etc.

Singollo ‘Grey-cloak’, 'Grey-mantle’; see Sindar, Thingol.



Sirion The Great River’ flowing from north to south and dividing West
from East Beleriand. Falls of Sirion. Fens of Siron. Gates of Sirion. Havens
of Sirion. Mouths of Sirion. Vale of Sirion.

Sons of Feanor See Maedhros, Maglor, Celegorm, Caranthir, Curufin,
Amrod, Amras. Often referred to as a group, especially after the death of
their father.

Soronume Name of a constellation.

Stone of the Hapless Memorial stone of Turin and Nienor by Cabed
Naeramarth in the river Teiglin.

Straight Road, Straight Way The path over the Sea into the Ancient or True
West, on which the ships of the Elves might still sail after the Downfall of
Numenor and the Changing of the World.

Strongbow Translation of Cuthalion, name of Beleg.

Sulimo Name of Manwe, rendered in the Valaquenta as 'Lord of the Breath
of Arda’ (literally ‘the Breather’).

Swanhaven See Alqualonde.

Swarthy Men See Easterlings.

Talath Dirnen The Guarded Plain, north of Nargothrond.

Talath Rhunen ‘The East Vale’, earlier name of Thargelion.

Taniquetil ‘High White Peak’, highest of the mountains of the Pelori and
the highest mountain of Arda, upon whose summit are Ilmarin, the
mansions of Manwe and Varda; also called the White Mountain, the Holy
Mountain, and the Mountain of Manwe. See Oiolosse.

Tar-Ancalimon Fourteenth King of Numenor, in whose time the
Numenoreans became divided into opposed parties.

Taras Mountain on a promontory of Nevrast; beneath it was Vinyamar, the
dwelling of Turgon before he went to Gondolin.

Tar-Atanamir Thirteenth King of Numenor, to whom the Messengers of the
Valar came.

Tar-Calion Quenya name of Ar-Pharazon.

Tar-Ciryatan Twelfth King of Numenor, ‘the Shipbuilder’.

Tar-Elendil Fourth King of Numenor, father of Silmarien, from whom
Elendil was descended.

Tar-Minastir Eleventh King of Numenor, who aided Gil-galad against
Sauron.

Tar-Minyatur Name of Elros Half-elven as first King of Numenor.

Tar-Miriel See Miriel (2).

Tarn Aeluin The lake on Dorthonion where Barahir and his companions



made their lair, and where they were slain.

Tar-Palantir Twenty-fourth King of Numenor, who repented of the ways of
the Kings, and took his name in Quenya: ‘He who looks afar’. See
Inziladun.

Taur-en-Faroth The wooded highlands to the west of the river Narog above
Nargothrond; also called the High Faroth.

Taur-im-Duinath ‘The Forest between Rivers’, name of the wild country
south of the Andram between Sirion and Gelion.

Taur-nu-Fuin Later name of Dorthonion: ‘the Forest under Night’. Cf.
Delduwath.

Tauron ‘The Forester’ (translated in the Valaquenta ‘Lord of Forests’), a
name of Orome among the Sindar. Cf. Aldaron.

Teiglin A tributary of Sirion, rising in Ered Wethrin and bounding the Forest
of Brethil on the south; see also Crossings of Teiglin.

Telchar The most renowned of the smiths of Nogrod, the maker of Angrist
and (according to Aragorn in The Two Towers III 6) of Narsil.

Telemnar Twenty-sixth King of Gondor.

Teleri The third and greatest of the three hosts of the Eldar on the westward
journey from Cuivienen, led by Elwe (Thingol) and Olwe. Their own name
for themselves was Lindar, the Singers; the name Teleri, the Last-comers,
the Hindmost, was given to them by those before them on the march. Many
of the Teleri did not leave Middle-earth; the Sindar and the Nandor were
Telerin Elves in origin.

Telperion The elder of the Two Trees of Valinor. Called the White Tree.
Telumendil Name of a constellation.

Thalion ‘Steadfast, Strong’; see Hurin.

Thalos The second of the tributaries of Gelion in Ossiriand.

Thangorodrim ‘Mountains of Tyranny’, reared by Morgoth above Angband;
broken down in the Great Battle at the end of the First Age.

Thargelion ‘The Land beyond Gelion’, between Mount Rerir and the river
Ascar, where Caranthir dwelt; called also Dor Caranthir and Talath
Rhunen.

Thingol ‘Grey-cloak’, ‘Grey-mantle’ (in Quenya Sindacollo, Singollo), the
name by which Elwe, leader with his brother Olwe of the host of the Teleri
from Cuivienen and afterwards King of Doriath, was known in Beleriand;
also called the Hidden King. See Elwe.

Thorondor ‘King of Eagles.’ Cf. The Return of the King VI 4: ‘Old
Thorondor, who built his eyries in the inaccessible peaks of the Encircling
Mountains when Middle-earth was young’. See Crissaegrim.



Thousand Caves See Menegroth.

Thranduil Sindarin Elf, King of the Silvan Elves in the north of Greenwood
the Great (Mirkwood); father of Legolas, who was of the Fellowship of the
Ring.

Thuringwethil 'Woman of Secret Shadow’, the messenger of Sauron from
Tol-in-Gaurhoth who took the form of a great bat, and in whose shape
Luthien entered Angband.

Tilion A Maia, steersman of the Moon.

Tintalle 'The Kindler’, a name of Varda as maker of the Stars. She is called
thus in Galadriel’s lament in Lorien, The Fellowship of the Ring II 8. Cf.
Elbereth, Elentari.

Tinuviel The name that Beren gave to Luthien: a poetic word for the
nightingale, 'Daughter of Twilight’. See Luthien.

Tirion ‘Great Watch-tower’, the city of the Elves on the hill of Tuna in
Aman.

Tol Eressea ‘The Lonely Isle’ (also simply Eressea ), on which the Vanyar
and the Noldor and afterwards the Teleri were drawn across the ocean by
Ulmo, and which was at last rooted in the Bay of Eldamar near to the coasts
of Aman. On Eressea the Teleri long remained before they went to
Alqualonde; and there dwelt many of the Noldor and the Sindar after the
ending of the First Age.

Tol Galen ‘The Green Isle’ in the river Adurant in Ossiriand, where Beren
and Luthien dwelt after their return.

Tol-in-Gaurhoth ‘Isle of Werewolves’, name of Tol Sirion after its capture
by Sauron.

Tol Morwen Island in the sea after the drowning of Beleriand on which
stood the memorial stone of Turin, Nienor, and Morwen.

Tol Sirion Island in the river in the Pass of Sirion on which Finrod built the
tower of Minas Tirith; after its capture by Sauron named Tol-in-Gaurhoth.
Tulkas A Vala, the ‘greatest in strength and deeds of prowess’, who came
last to Arda; also called Astaldo.

Tumhalad Valley in the land between the rivers Ginglith and Narog, where
the host of Nargothrond was defeated.

Tumladen ‘The Wide Valley’, the hidden vale in the Encircling Mountains
in the midst of which stood the city of Gondolin. ( Tumladen was afterwards
the name of a valley in Gondor: The Return of the King V 1.)

Tumunzahar See Nogrod.

Tuna The green hill in the Calacirya on which Tirion, the city of the Elves,
was built.



Tuor Son of Huor and Rian, fostered by the Grey-elves of Mithrim; entered
Gondolin bearing the message of Ulmo; wedded Idril Turgon’s daughter,
and with her and their son Earendil escaped from the destruction of the city;
in his ship Earrame set sail into the West.

Turambar ‘Master of Doom’, the last name taken by Turin, during his days
in the Forest of Brethil.

Turgon Called the Wise; the second son of Fingolfin; dwelt at Vinyamar in
Nevrast before he departed in secret to Gondolin, which he ruled until his
death in the sack of the city; father of Idril the mother of Earendil: called
(like Thingol) the Hidden King.

Tur Haretha The burial-mound of the Lady Haleth in the Forest of Brethil
(see Haudh-en-Arwen).

Turin Son of Hurin and Morwen; chief subject of the lay named Nam i Hm
Hurin from which Chapter 21 was derived. For his other names see
Neithan, Gorthol, Agarwaen, Mormegil, Wildman of the Woods, Turambar.
Twilight Meres See Aelin-uial.

Two Kindreds Elves and Men.

Two Trees of Valinor.

Uinen A Maia, the Lady of the Seas, spouse of Osse.

Ulairi See Ring-wraiths.

Uldor Called the Accursed; son of Ulfang the Black; slain by Maglor in the
Nirnaeth Arnoediad.

Ulfang Called the Black; a chieftain of the Easterlings, who with his three
sons followed Caranthir, and proved faithless in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.
Ulfast Son of Ulfang the Black, slain by the sons of Bor in the Nirnaeth
Arnoediad.

Ulmo A Vala, one of the Aratar, called Lord of Waters and King of the Sea.
The name was interpreted by the Eldar to mean ‘The Pourer’ or ‘The
Rainer’.

Ulumuri The great horns of Ulmo made by the Maia Sal

Ulwarth Son of Ulfang the Black, slain by the sons of Bor in the Nirnaeth

Arnoediad.

Umanyar Name given to those Elves who went on the westward journey
from Cuivienen but did not reach Aman: ‘Those not of Aman’, beside
Amanyar ‘Those of Aman’.

Umarth ‘Ill-fate’, a fictitious name for his father given out by Turin in
Nargothrond.

Umbar Great natural haven and fortress of the Numenoreans south of the



Bay of Belfalas.

Undying Lands Aman and Eressea; also called the Deathless Lands.
Ungoliant The great spider, destroyer with Melkor of the Trees of Valinor.
Shelob in The Lord of the Rings was ‘the last child of Ungoliant to trouble
the unhappy world’ ( The Two Towers IV 9).

Union of Maedhros The league formed by Maedhros to defeat Morgoth that
ended in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.

Urthel One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.

Uruloki Quenya word meaning ‘fire-serpent’, dragon.

Utumno The first great stronghold of Melkor, in the north of Middle-earth,
destroyed by the Valar.

Vaire ‘The Weaver’, one of the Valier, the spouse of Namo Mandos.
Valacirca ‘The Sickle of the Valar’, name of the constellation of the Great
Bear.

Valandil Youngest son of Isildur; third King of Arnor.

Valaquenta ‘Account of the Valar’, a short work treated as a separate entity
from The Silmarillion proper.

Valar ‘Those with Power’, ‘The Powers’ (singular Vala ); name given to
those great Ainur who entered into Ea at the beginning of Time, and
assumed the function of guarding and governing Arda. Called also the
Great Ones, the Rulers of Arda, the Lords of the West, the Lords of Valinor.
Passim; see also Ainur, Aratar.

Valaraukar ‘Demons of Might’ (singular Valarauko), Quenya form
corresponding to Sindarin Balrog.

Valaroma The horn of the Vala Orome.

Valier ‘The Queens of the Valar’ (singular Valie ); a term used only in the
Valaquenta.

Valimar See Valmar.

Valinor The land of the Valar in Aman, beyond the mountains of the Pelori;
also called the Guarded Realm.

Valmar The city of the Valar in Valinor; the name also occurs in the form
Valimar. In Galadriel’s lament in Lorien ( The Fellowship of the Ring II 8)
Valimar is made equivalent to Valinor.

Vana One of the Valier, the sister of Yavanna and spouse of Orome; called
the Ever-young.

Vanyar The first host of the Eldar on the westward journey from Cuivienen,
led by Ingwe. The name (singular Vanya) means ‘the Fair’, referring to the
golden hair of the Vanyar; see Finarfin.



Varda The Exalted’, The Lofty’; also called the Lady of the Stars. Greatest
of the Valier, the spouse of Manwe, dwelling with him on Taniquetil. Other
names of Varda, as maker of the Stars, were Elbereth, Elentari, Tintalle.
Vasa The Consumer’, a name of the Sun among the Noldor.

Vdya One of the Three Rings of the Elves, the Ring of Air, borne by Gil-
galad and afterwards by Elrond; also called The Ring of Sapphire.

Vmgilot (In full Quenya form Vmgilote ). Toam-flower’, the name of
Earendil’s ship; see Rothinzil.

Vinyamar The house of Turgon in Nevrast under Mount Taras. The meaning
is probably ‘New Dwelling’.

Voronwe The Steadfast’, Elf of Gondolin, the only mariner to survive from
the seven ships sent into the West after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad; met with
Tuor at Vinyamar and guided him to Gondolin.

Westernesse See Anadune, Numenor.

White Council The Council of the Wise in the Third Age formed to oppose
Sauron.

White Mountain See Taniquetil.

White Tree See Telperion, Galathilion, Nimloth (1). The White Trees of
Minas Ithil and Minas Anor.

Wildman of the Woods Name adopted by Turin when he first came among
the Men of Brethil.

Wilwarin Name of a constellation. The word meant ‘butterfly’ in Quenya,
and the constellation was perhaps Cassiopeia.

Wizards See Istari.

Woodland Elves See Silvan Elves.

Yavanna ‘Giver of fruits’; one of the Valier, numbered among the Aratar;
the spouse of Aule; called also Kementari.

Year of Lamentation The year of the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.